Thus Spoke Zarathustra Among the Daughters of the Desert 1 Do not go! (said then the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra’s shadow) stay with us, otherwise the old, dull affliction may again assail us.  That old sorcerer has already done his worst for our benefit, and just look, the good, pious pope there has tears in his eyes and has again embarked on the sea of melancholy.  These kings there may still put on a brave face before us: for they have learned that better than any of us today! But had they no witnesses, I wager that with them, too, the bitter business would begin again – the bitter business of drifting clouds, of damp melancholy, of veiled skies, of stolen suns, of howling autumn winds, the bitter business of our howling and cries of distress: stay with us, O Zarathustra! Here there is much hidden misery that wants to speak out, much evening, much cloud, much damp air! You have fed us with strong man’s fare and nourishing sayings: do not let us, for dessert, be assailed again by delicate, effeminate spirits! You alone make the air around you robust and clear I Have I ever found on earth such good air as with you in your cave? I have seen many lands, my nose has learned to test and appraise many kinds of air: but with you my nostrils taste their greatest delight! Except, except – oh forgive an old memory! Forgive me an old after-dinner song that I once composed among the daughters of the desert - for with them there was the same good, clear, oriental air; there I was farthest away from cloudy, damp, melancholy Old Europe! In those days I loved such oriental girls and other blue kingdoms of heaven, over which no clouds and no thoughts hung.  You would not believe how prettily they sat there when they were not dancing, deep but without thoughts, like little secrets, like ribboned riddles, like after-dinner nuts - motley and strange indeed! but without clouds: riddles that one can read: to please such girls I then devised an after-dinner psalm.  Thus spoke the wanderer and shadow; and before anyone could answer him he had seized the old sorcerer’s harp, crossed his legs, and looked calmly and sagely about him -with his nostrils, however, he drew in the air slowly and inquiringly, like someone tasting strange air in strange lands.  Thereupon he began to sing with a kind of roaring.  2 Deserts grew: woe to him who harbours deserts ! Ha! Solemnly! Solemnly indeed! A worthy beginning! Solemnly in an African way! Worthy of a lion Or of a moral screech-ape – but it is nothing for you, You desert maidens, At whose feet I, For the first time, A European under palm-trees, Am permitted to sit.  Selah.  Wonderful, truly! Here I now sit, Beside the desert, and Yet so far from the desert, And in no way devastated: For I am swallowed down By this smallest oasis: – it simply opened, yawning, Its sweetest mouth, The sweetest-smelling of all little mouths: Then I fell in, Down, straight through – among you, You dearest maidens! Selah.  All hail to that whale If it made things so pleasant For its guests! – you understand My learned allusion? All hail to his belly If it was As sweet an oasis-belly As this is: which, however, I call in question, – since I come from Europe, Which is more sceptical than Any little old wife.  May God improve it! Amen! Here I now sit In this smallest oasis Like a date, Brown, sweet, oozing golden, Longing for a girl’s rounded mouth, But longing more for girlish, Ice-cold, snow-white, cutting Teeth: for these do The hearts of all hot dates lust.  Selah.  Like, all too like That aforesaid southern fruit Do I lie here, by little Flying insects Sniffed and played around, And by even smaller, More foolish and more sinful Wishes and notions, Besieged by you, You silent girl-kittens Full of misgivings, Dudu and Suleika, Sphinxed round , that I may cram Much feeling into two words: (May God forgive me This sin of speech!) I sit here sniffing the finest air, Air of Paradise, truly, Bright, buoyant air, gold-streaked, As good air as ever Fell from the moon - Came it by chance, Or did it happen by wantonness, As the old poets tell? I, doubter, however, call it In question; since I come From Europe, Which is more sceptical than any Little old wife.  May God improve it I Amen.  Drinking in the fairest air, With nostrils swollen like goblets, Without future, without memories, Thus do I sit here, you Dearest maidens, And regard the palm-tree, And watch how, like a dancer, It bends and bows and sways at the hips, – if one watches long one follows suit! Like a dancer who, it would seem, Has stood long, dangerously long, Always on one little leg? – so that she has forgotten, it would seem, Her other leg? At least, in vain I sought the missing Twin-jewel – that is, the other leg – In the sacred vicinity Of her dearest, daintiest Little fluttering, flickering, fan-swirling skirt.  Yes, if you would quite believe me, You sweet maidens: She has lost it! It has gone! Gone for ever! That other leg! Oh, what a shame about that other dear leg! Where can it now be, sorrowing forsaken? That lonely leg? Perhaps in fear before an Angry, blonde-maned Lion-monster? Or perhaps even Gnawed off, broken in pieces - Pitiable, alas! alas! broken in pieces! Selah.  Oh do not weep, Gentle hearts! Do not weep, you Date-hearts! Milk-bosoms! You heart-caskets Of sweetwood! Do not weep, Pale Dudu! Be a man, Suleika! Courage! Courage! – Or would perhaps Something bracing, heart-bracing, Be in place here? An anointed proverb? A solemn exhortation? Ha! Up, dignity! Virtuous dignity! European dignity! Blow, blow again, Bellows of virtue! Ha! Roar once again, Roar morally! Roar like a moral lion Before the daughters of the desert! For virtuous howling, You dearest maidens, Is loved best of all by European ardour, European appetite! And here I stand now, As European, I cannot do otherwise, so help me God! 52 Amen! Deserts grow: woe to him who harbours deserts! Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Poets ‘S INCE I have known the body better,’ said Zarathustra to one of his disciples, ‘the spirit has been only figuratively spirit to me; and all that is “intransitory” – that too has been only an “image”’.  19 ‘I heard you say that once before,’ answered the disciple; ‘and then you added: “But the poets lie too much.” Why did you say that the poets lie too much?’ ‘Why?’ said Zarathustra.  ‘You ask why? I am not one of those who may be questioned about their Why.  ‘Do my experiences date from yesterday? It is a long time since I experienced the reasons for my opinions.  ‘Should I not have to be a barrel of memory, if I wanted to carry my reasons, too, about with me? ‘It is already too much for me to retain even my opinions; and many a bird has flown away.  ‘And now and then I find in my dove-cote an immigrant creature which is strange to me and which trembles when I lay my hand upon it.  ‘Yet what did Zarathustra once say to you? That the poets lie too much? – But Zarathustra too is a poet.  ‘Do you now believe that he spoke the truth? Why do you believe it?’ The disciple answered: ‘I believe in Zarathustra.’ But Zarathustra shook his head and smiled.  Belief does not make me blessed (he said), least of all belief in myself.  But granted that someone has said in all seriousness that the poets lie too much: he is right – we do lie too much.  We know too little and are bad learners: so we have to lie.  And which of us poets has not adulterated his wine? Many a poisonous hotch-potch has been produced in our cellars, many an indescribable thing has been done there.  And because we know little, the poor in spirit delight our hearts, especially when they are young women.  And we desire even those things the old women tell one another in the evening.  We call that the eternal-womanly in us.  And we believe in the people and its ‘wisdom’ as if there were a special secret entrance to knowledge which is blocked to him who has learned anything.  But all poets believe this: that he who, lying in the grass or in lonely bowers, pricks up his ears, catches a little of the things that are between heaven and earth.  And if they experience tender emotions, the poets always think that nature herself is in love with them: And that she creeps up to their ears, to speak secrets and amorous flattering words into them: of this they boast and pride themselves before all mortals! Alas, there are so many things between heaven and earth of which only the poets have let themselves dream! And especially above heaven: for all gods are poets’ images, poets’ surreptitiousness! Truly, it draws us ever upward – that is, to cloudland: we set our motley puppets on the clouds and then call them gods and supermen.  And are they not light enough for these insubstantial seats? – all these gods and supermen.  Alas, how weary I am of all the unattainable that is supposed to be reality.  Alas, how weary I am of the poets! When Zarathustra had spoken thus, his disciple was angry with him, but kept silent.  And Zarathustra, too, kept silent; and his eye had turned within him as if it were gazing into the far distance.  At length he sighed and drew a breath.  I am of today and of the has-been (he said then); but there is something in me that is of tomorrow and of the day-after-tomorrow and of the shall-be.  I have grown weary of the poets, the old and the new: they all seem to me superficial and shallow seas.  They have not thought deeply enough: therefore their feeling – has not plumbed the depths.  A little voluptuousness and a little tedium: that is all their best ideas have ever amounted to.  All their harp-jangling is to me so much coughing and puffing of phantoms; what have they ever known of the ardour of tones! They are not clean enough for me, either: they all disturb their waters so that they may seem deep.  And in that way they would like to show themselves reconcilers: but to me they remain mediators and meddlers, and mediocre and unclean men! Ah, indeed I cast my net into their sea and hoped to catch fine fish; but I always drew out an old god’s head.  Thus the sea gave a stone to the hungry man.  And they themselves may well originate from the sea.  To be sure, one finds pearls in them: then they themselves are all the more like hard shell-fish.  And instead of the soul I often found in them salty slime.  They learned vanity, too, from the sea: is the sea not the peacock of peacocks? It unfurls its tail even before the ugliest of buffaloes, it never wearies of its lace-fan of silver and satin.  The buffalo looks on insolently, his soul like the sand, yet more like the thicket, but most like the swamp.  What are beauty and sea and peacock-ornaments to him? I speak this parable to the poets.  Truly, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks and a sea of vanity! The poet’s spirit wants spectators, even if they are only buffaloes! But I have grown weary of this spirit: and I see the day coming when it will grow weary of itself.  Already I have seen the poets transformed; I have seen them direct their glance upon themselves.  I have seen penitents of the spirit appearing: they grew out of the poets.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Chairs of Virtue Z ARATHUSTRA heard a wise man praised who was said to discourse well on sleep and virtue: he was greatly honoured and rewarded for it, and all the young men sat before his chair.  Zarathustra went to him and sat before his chair with all the young men.  And thus spoke the wise man: Honour to sleep and modesty before it! That is the first thing! And avoid all those who sleep badly and are awake at night! Even the thief is shamed when confronted with sleep: he always steals softly through the night.  But shameless is the night-watchman, shamelessly he bears his horn.  Sleeping is no mean art: you need to stay awake all day to doit.  You must overcome yourself ten times a day: that causes a fine weariness and is opium to the soul.  Ten times must you be reconciled to yourself again: for overcoming is bitterness and the unreconciled man sleeps badly.  You must discover ten truths a day: otherwise you will seek truth in the night too, with your soul still hungry.  You must laugh and be cheerful ten times a day: or your stomach, that father of affliction, will disturb you in the night.  Few know it, but one must have all the virtues in order to sleep well.  Shall I bear false witness? Shall I commit adultery? Shall I covet my neighbour’s maidservant? None of this would be consistent with good sleep.  And even when one has all the virtues, there is still one thing to remember: to send even these virtues to sleep at the proper time.  That they may not quarrel among themselves, the pretty little women! And over you, unhappy man! Peace with God and with your neighbour: thus good sleep will have it.  And peace too with your neighbour’s devil.  Otherwise he will haunt you at night.  Honour and obedience to the authorities, and even to the crooked authorities! Thus good sleep will have it.  How can I help it that power likes to walk on crooked legs? I shall always call him the best herdsman who leads his sheep to the greenest meadows: that accords with good sleep.  I do not desire much honour, nor great treasure: they excite spleen.  But one sleeps badly without a good name and a small treasure.  The company of a few is more welcome to me than bad company: but they must come and go at the proper time.  That accords with good sleep.  The poor in spirit, too, please me greatly: they further sleep.  Blessed and happy they are indeed, especially if one always agrees with their views.  Thus for the virtuous man does the day pass.  And when night comes I take good care not to summon sleep! He, the lord of virtues, does not like to be summoned! But I remember what I have done and thought during the day.  Ruminating I ask myself, patient as a cow: What were your ten overcomings? And which were the ten reconciliations and the ten truths and the ten fits of laughter with which my heart enjoyed itself? As I ponder such things rocked by my forty thoughts, sleep, the lord of virtue, suddenly overtakes me uncalled.  Sleep knocks on my eyes: they grow heavy.  Sleep touches my mouth: it stays open.  Truly, he comes to me on soft soles, the dearest of thieves, and steals my thoughts from me: I stand as silent as this chair.  But I do not stand for long: already I am lying down.  When Zarathustra heard the wise man’s words he laughed in his heart: for through them a light had dawned upon him.  And he spoke thus to his heart: This wise man with his forty thoughts seems to me a fool: but I believe he knows well enough how to sleep.  Happy is he who lives in this wise man’s neighbourhood.  Such sleep is contagious, even through a thick wall.  A spell dwells even in his chair.  And the young men have not sat in vain before the preacher of virtue.  His wisdom is: stay awake in order to sleep well.  And truly, if life had no sense and I had to choose nonsense, this would be the most desirable nonsense for me, too.  Now it is clear to me what people were once seeking above all when they sought the teachers of virtue.  They sought good sleep and opium virtues to bring it about! To all of these lauded wise men of the academic chairs, wisdom meant sleep without dreams: they knew no better meaning of life.  And today too there are some like this preacher of virtue, and not always so honourable: but their time is up.  And they shall not stand for much longer: already they are lying down.  Blessed are these drowsy men: for they shall soon drop off.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra 1 T HE first thing a reader of Thus Spoke Zarathustra will notice, even before he/she notices what is being said, is the manner of saying it: or rather, the excess of manner.  The book’s worst fault is excess.  That this is the most forgivable of faults doesn’t change the fact that it is a fault.  As it happens, excess is the one fault no one could impute to Nietzsche’s subsequent works: there concision, brevity, directness of statement are present to a degree not even approximated by any other German philosopher (and hardly equalled by any writer of any kind).  It is clear that the rhetorical-oratorical is something Nietzsche was impelled to, gave way to and thus got rid of in Zarathustra : the eruption of words, metaphors, figures and word-play suggests an eruption of feeling.  It will be our job here to try to discover why this eruption became necessary, and why just at this time (i.e.  January I883), and thus to understand better what this great odd book is really about.  2 Thus Spoke Zarathustra is (to anticipate out conclusion somewhat) the resolution of a long-sustained intellectual crisis.  Let the word ‘intellectual’ not mislead: unlike most people, even most philosophers, Nietzsche lived with his intellectual problems as with realities, he experienced a similar emotional commitment to them as other men experience to their wife and children.  It is this, indeed, which is the badge of his uniqueness and the key to understanding him.  He makes clear what he means by intellectual problems in these few posthumously-published notes: As soon as you feel yourself against me you have ceased to understand my position and consequently my arguments! You have to be the victim of the same passion ! I want to awaken the greatest mistrust of myself: I speak only of things I have experienced and do not offer only events in the head.  One must want to experience the great problems with one’s body and one’s soul.  I have at all times written my writings with my whole heart and soul: I do not know what purely intellectual problems are.  You know these things as thoughts, but your thoughts are not your experiences, they are an echo and after-effect of your experiences: as when your room trembles when a carriage goes past.  I however am sitting in the carriage, and often I am the carriage itself.  In a man who thinks like this, the dichotomy between thinking and feeling, intellect and passion, has really disappeared.  He feels his thoughts.  He can fall in love with an idea.  An idea can make him ill.  His forbears were Lutherans.  Many were in the Lutheran church: his father and both grandfathers were Lutheran ministers, and his paternal grandfather was a Superintendent, the Lutheran equivalent of a bishop.  As a boy he was, as befitted a pastor’s son, intensely pious, but he lost his faith during his late teens and abandoned the study of theology.  He replaced religious belief with freelance philosophizing, upon which he brought to bear the intensity of involvement he had withdrawn from religion.  The path away from the family parsonage was the path of scepticism.  Schopenhaueran metaphysics and Wagnerian music were detours, ersatz religion.  In the summer of 1876, in his thirty-second year, he returned to the sceptical path and started on the series of aphoristic books which constitute probably the most thorough course in scepticism produced in the nineteenth century.  Human, All Too Human appeared in 1878, Assorted Opinions and Maxims in 1879, The Wanderer and his Shadow in 1880; in June 1881 he published Dawn , These books embody reflexions on a very wide range of subjects, but the controlling tendency of his thought during all these five years is nonetheless unmistakable: it is to break down all the concepts and qualities in which mankind takes pride and pleasure into a few simple qualities in which no one takes pride of pleasure and to see in the latter the origin of the former; likewise to undermine morality by exposing its non-moral basis and rationality by exposing its irrational basis; likewise to abolish the ‘higher’ world, the metaphysical, by accounting for all its supposed manifestations in terms of the human, phenomenal, and even animal world; in brief, the controlling tendency of his thought is nihilist .  The cheerful tone, the stylistic beauty, the coolness of the performance cannot conceal that what is taking place is destruction.  The fact was, in any event, obvious to Nietzsche himself; and of all his problems this became the greatest, the most pressing, the one with which his ‘passion’ was most engaged.  He had come close to a total devaluation of humanity and because he could as yet see no way of halting this movement he took the only course open to him: he pushed it on to its limit.  The earlier parts of his next book, The Gay Science , were intended for Dawn ; they were excluded partly because he thought that book had grown sufficiently bulky, but also, I would say, because of the enhanced vehemence of what he was now thinking and writing.  The nihilism of his position is now stated frankly: The four errors , Man has been reared by his errors: first he never saw himself other than imperfectly, second he attributed to himself imaginary qualities, third he felt himself in a false order of rank with animal and nature, fourth he continually invented new tables of values and for a time took each of them to be eternal and unconditional, so that now this, now that human drive and state took first place and was, as a consequence of this evaluation, ennobled.  If one deducts the effect of these four errors, one has also deducted away humanity, humaneness and ‘human dignity’.  (115).  He looks more squarely in the face and discusses more urgently the question whether ‘truth’ is in any way discoverable or whether mankind is not necessitated to error: Life no argument .  We have arranged for ourselves a world in which we are able to live – with the postulation of bodies, lines, surfaces, causes and effects, motion and rest, form and content: without these articles of faith nobody could now endure to live! But that does not yet mean they ate something proved and demonstrated.  Life is no argument; among the conditions of life could be error.  (121).  He reaches what seems to be the final term in this line of argument: Ultimate scepticism .  What then in the last resort are the truths of mankind? – They are the irrefutable errors of mankind.  (265).  His conception of the world as meaningless and chaotic is rounded off.  That God is dead is announced in a famous passage: The madman .  Have you not heard of that madman who lit a lantern in the bright morning hours, ran to the market place and cried incessantly: ‘I am looking for God! I am looking for God!’ -As many of those who did not believe in God were standing together there he excited considerable laughter.  Have you lost him then? said one.  Did he lose his way like a child? said another.  Or is he hiding? Is he afraid of us? Has he gone on a voyage? or emigrated? – thus they shouted and laughed.  The madman sprang into their midst and pierced them with his glances.  ‘Where has God gone?’ he cried.  ‘I shall tell you.  We have killed him — you and I.  We are all his murderers.  But how have we done this? How were we able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What did we do when we unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither are we moving now? Away from all suns? Are we not perpetually falling? Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there any up or down left? Are we not straying as through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is more and more night not coming on all the time? Must not lanterns be lit in the morning? Do we not hear anything yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do we not smell anything yet of God’s decomposition? – gods too decompose.  God is dead.  God remains dead.  And we have killed him.  How shall we, the murderers of all murderers, console ourselves? That which was holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet possessed has bled to death under our knives – who will wipe this blood off us? With what water could we purify ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we need to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must not we ourselves become gods simply to seem worthy of it? There has never been a greater deed – and whoever shall be born after us, for the sake of this deed he shall be part of a higher history than all history hitherto.’…(125).  Not only is there no God, there is no other ordering principle either: Let us beware ! Let us beware of thinking the world is a living being.  Whither should it spread itself? What should it nourish itself with? How could it grow and multiply? We know indeed more or less what the organic is: and shall we reinterpret the unspeakably derivative, late, rare, chance phenomena which we perceive only on the surface of the earth into the essential, universal, eternal, as they do who call the universe an organism? I find that disgusting.  Let us likewise beware of believing the universe is a machine; it is certainly not constructed so as to perform some operation, we do it far too great honour with the word ‘machine’.  Let us beware of presupposing that something so orderly as the cyclical motions of our planetary neighbours are the general and universal case; even a glance at the Milky Way gives rise to doubt whether there may not there exist far more crude and contradictory motions, likewise stars with eternally straight trajectories, and the like.  The astral order in which we live is an exception; this order and the apparent permanence which is conditional upon it is in its turn made possible by the exception of exceptions: the formation of the organic.  The total nature of the world is, on the other hand, to all eternity chaos, not in the sense that necessity is lacking but in that order, structure, form, beauty, wisdom, and whatever other human aesthetic notions we may have are lacking.  Judged from the viewpoint of our reason, the unsuccessful cases are far and away the rule, the exceptions are not the secret objective, and the whole contraption repeats its theme, which can never be called a melody, over and over again to eternity – and ultimately even the term ‘unsuccessful case’ is already a humanization which contains a reproof.  But how can we venture to reprove or praise the universe! Let us beware of attributing to it heartlessness and unreason or their opposites: it is neither perfect nor beautiful nor noble, and has no desire to become any of these; it is by no means striving to imitate mankind! It is quite impervious to all our aesthetic and moral judgements! It has likewise no impulse to self-preservation or impulses of any kind; neither does it know any laws.  Let us beware of saying there are laws in nature.  There are only necessities: there is no one to command, no one to obey, no one to transgress….  Let us beware of saying that death is the opposite of life.  The living being is only a species of the dead, and a very rare species….  (109).  These passages and very many more like them are included in the first three of the four books which constitute the original edition of The Gay Science : they seem to me to mark the end of the road on which Nietzsche set out when he left his forefathers’ faith and went off alone.  I do not see how he or anyone could go further in this direction.  If he had not found some other direction he would at this time – the second half of 1881 – have reached his end station: and it is his knowledge that this is so that constitutes the intellectual crisis of which Zarathtutra is the resolution.  3 We must now take a look at another aspect of Nietzsche’s authorship.  So far as modern Europe is concerned he was very much a pioneer in the demolition of ancient habits of mind and moral prejudices, and he was moreover very little read during his active life: so that to a great degree he had to be his own commentator and critic.  There is an element in his work which derives directly from this fact.  You will often hear not one voice but two: one asserts, the other objects and qualifies.  Or one draws a sombre, the other a happy conclusion from the same premisses.  Now one important duty of the second voice is to intimate, at strategic points in the books, that all the demolition going on may be only the essential preliminary and prerequisite for new construction; and none of these passages is more eloquent or revealing than that which stands at the end of Dawn : We aeronauts of the spirit ! All those brave birds which fly out into the distance, into the farthest distance – it is certain! somewhere or other they will be unable to go on and will perch down on a mast or a bare cliff-face – and they will even be thankful for this miserable accommodation! But who could venture to infer from that, that there was not an immense open space before them, that they had flown as far as one could fly! All our great teachers and predecessors have at last come to a stop…; it will be the same with you and me! But what does that matter to you and me! Other birds will fly farther ! This insight and faith of ours vies with them in flying up and away; it rises above our heads and above our impotence into the heights and from there surveys the distance and sees before it the flocks of birds which, far stronger than we, still strive whither we have striven, and where everything is sea, sea, sea! – And whither then would we go? Would we cross the sea? Whither does this mighty longing draw us, this longing that is worth more to us than any pleasure? Why just in this direction, thither where all the suns of humanity have hitherto gone down? Will it perhaps be said of us one day that we too, steering westward, hoped to reach an India – but that it was our fate to be wrecked against infinity? Or, my brothers? Or? – (575).  This makes a brave sound, and the feeling that it expresses – that there are new worlds to be opened up – came to dominate more and more from the summer of 1881 onwards.  ‘Ideas have arisen on my horizon the like of which I have never seen before…’, Nietzsche wrote to Peter Gast on 14 August 1881.  ‘I shall certainly have to live a few years more!…The intensity of my feelings makes me shudder and laugh – a couple of times I couldn’t leave my room for the ludicrous reason that my eyes were inflamed….  Each time I had been weeping too much on my walks the day before, not sentimental tears but tears of rejoicing; and as I wept I sang and talked nonsense, filled with a new vision…’ This is not an altogether new note, but the intensity is new and the ‘ideas’ alluded to are also new and new in this sense that they are direct attempts to go beyond the nihilist conclusions of the past five years without being obliged to retract any of them.  The fourth book of The Gay Science is a signpost pointing the way Nietzsche is going.  Always under the influence of significant dates, he opens it with a passage written on New Year’s Day 1882: For the New Year .  I am still living, I am still thinking: I have to go on living because I have to go on thinking.  Sum, ergo cogito: cogito, ergo sum .  Today everyone is permitted to express his desire and dearest thoughts: so I too would like to say what I have desired of myself today and what thought was the first to cross my heart this year – what thought shall be the basis, guarantee and sweetness of all my future life! I want to learn more and more to see what is necessary in things as the beautiful in them – thus I shall become one of those who make things beautiful.  Amor fati: may that be my love from now on! I want to wage no war against the ugly.  I do not want to accuse, I do not want even to accuse the accusers.  May looking away be my only form of negation! And, all in all: I want to be at all times hereafter only an affirmer (ein Ja -sagender) ! (276).  This challenge to everything nihilist in his nature is followed a little later by a call to action, battle and positive commitment phrased in one of his most famous coinages – perhaps actually the most famous phrase in all his works: I greet all the signs that a more manly, warlike age is coming, which will, above all, bring valour again into honour! For it has to prepare the way for a yet higher age, and assemble the force which that age will one day have need of – that age which will carry heroism into knowledge and wage war for the sake of ideas and their consequences.  To that end many brave pioneers are needed now…: men who know how to be silent, solitary, resolute,…who have an innate disposition to seek in all things that which must be overcome in them: men to whom cheerfulness, patience, simplicity and contempt for the great vanities belong just as much as do generosity in victory and indulgence towards the little vanities of the defeated:…men with their own festivals, their own work-days, their own days of mourning, accustomed to and assured in command and equally ready to obey when necessary, equally proud in the one case as in the other, equally serving their own cause: men more imperilled, men more fruitful, happier men! For believe me! – the secret of realizing the greatest fruitfulness and the greatest enjoyment of existence is: to live dangerously ! Build your cities on the slopes of Vesuvius! Send your ships out into uncharted seas! Live in conflict with your equals and with yourselves! Be robbers and ravagers as long as you cannot be rulers and owners, you men of knowledge!…(283).  A new image of man, of what mankind might be, begins to appear: Excelsior ! ‘You will never again pray, never again worship, never again repose in limitless trust – you deny it to yourself to remain halted before an ultimate wisdom, ultimate good, ultimate power, and there unharness your thoughts – you have no perpetual guardian and friend for your seven solitudes…there is no longer for you any rewarder and recompenser, no final corrector – there is no longer any reason in what happens, no longer any love in what happens to you – there is no longer any resting-place open to your heart where it has only to find and no longer to seek, you resist any kind of ultimate peace, you want the eternal recurrence of war and peace – man of renuncktion, will you renounce in all this? Who will give you the strength for it? No one has yet possessed this strength!’ – There is a lake which one day denied it to itself to flow away and threw up a dam at the place where it formerly flowed away: since then this lake has risen higher and higher.  Perhaps it is precisely that renunciation which will also lend us the strength by which the renunciation itself can be endured; perhaps man will rise higher and higher from that time when he no longer flaws out into a god.  (285).  And the penultimate section of the book is a very curious suggestion for a formula of self- and life-affirmation: The heaviest burden .  What if a demon crept after you one day or night in your loneliest solitude and said to you: ‘This life, as you live it now and have lived it, you will have to live again and again, times without number; and there will be nothing new in it, but every pain and every joy and every thought and sigh and all the unspeakably small and great in your life must return to you, and everything in the same series and sequence – and in the same way this spider and this moonlight among the trees, and in the same way this moment and I myself.  The eternal hour-glass of existence will be turned again and again – and you with it, you dust of dust!’ – Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your teeth and curse the demon who thus spoke? Or have you experienced a tremendous moment in which you would have answered him: ‘You are a god and never did I hear anything more divine!’ If this thought gained power over you it would, as you are now, transform and perhaps crush you; the question in all and everything: ‘do you want this again and again, times without number?’ would lie as the heaviest burden upon all your actions.  Or how well disposed towards yourself and towards life would you have to become to have no greater desire than for this ultimate eternal sanction and sea!? (341).  In April 1882 began the one wholly serious sexual involvement of Nietzsche’s life: his brief and humiliating affair with Lou Salomé.  This is not the place to go into the details of that affair; I discuss it here at all only because it has some bearing on the ‘man in solitude’ aspect of Zarathustra and because it is part of the general state of crisis in which Nietzsche existed during the eighteen months from the summer of 1881 to the beginning of 1883.  Only two points need to be made.  Firstly, Nietzsche thought that the solitude in which he had been living since his enforced retirement from Basel University at Easter 1879 and which had been weighing more and more heavily upon him was about to come to an end.  In a letter to Lou Salomé (2 July 1882) he says that the previous day ‘it seemed as if it must be my birthday: you sent me your assent i.e.  to come and stay with him for three weeks, the best present anyone could have given me…Teubner a printer sent the first three proof-sheets of the Gey Science , and in addition to all this the last part of the manuscript of the Gay Science was completed, and therewith the work of six years (1876 to 1882), my entire “free-thought”!’ This means that when he wrote this letter he had just made a fair copy of the following passage, which closes The Gay Science in its original version: Incipit tragoedia .  When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and Lake Urmi and went into the mountains.  Here he had the enjoyment of his spirit and his solitude and he did not weary of it for ten years.  But at last his heart turned – and one morning he rose with the dawn, stepped before the sun, and spoke to it thus: ‘Great star! What would your happiness be, if you had not those for whom you shine! You have come up here to my cave for ten years: you would have grown weary of your light and of this journey, without me, my eagle and my serpent; but we waited for you every morning, took from you your superfluity and blessed you for it.  Behold! I am weary of my wisdom, like a bee that has gathered too much honey; I need hands outstretched to take it; I should like to give it away and distribute it, until the wise among men have again become happy in their folly and the poor happy in their wealth.  To that end, I must descend into the depths: as you do at evening, when you go behind the sea and bring light to the underworld too, superabundant star! – like you, I must go down — as men, to whom I want to descend, call it.  So bless me then, tranquil eye, that can behold without envy even an excessive happiness! Bless the cup that wants to overflow, that the waters may flow golden from him and bear the reflexion of your joy over all the world! Behold! This cup wants to be empty again, and Zarathustra wants to be man again.’ – Thus began Zarathustra’s down-going.  (342).  The sense of this passage is repeated in other words at the end of the above-quoted letter: ‘I don’t want to be lonely any more; I want to learn to be human again.  Alas, in this field I have almost everything still to learn!’ Undoubtedly Nietzsche at this point identified himself with another ‘teacher’ who came down out of solitude around his fortieth year.  The second point is that, after he was abandoned during the following October by Lou Salomé and had to realize that his hope of marrying her was definitely not going to be fulfilled, he fell into an abyss of despair.  I am not underrating the emotional effect which such a disappointment might normally be expected to produce, but its effect on Nietzsche was certainly very violent indeed, especially considering that his disposition was usually a cheerful one.  It should be recalled that he had been recurrently ill since 1871 – almost certainly a consequence of a syphilitic infection contracted when a student – and the inability of these attacks to depress him or do more than delay his work is a witness to the resilience of his temperament.  His failure with Lou, however, threw him for a time completely off balance – how far off balance can be gauged, for example, from this letter to Franz Overbeck, posted on Christmas Day 1882: I have suffered from the disgraceful and anguishing recollections of this past summer as from a kind of madness….  They involve a conflict of contrary emotions which I am not equal to.…If only I could sleep! But the strongest sleeping-draughts help as little as do the six to eight hour walks I take.  If I cannot find the magic formula to turn all this – muck to gold , I am lost….  I now mistrust everybody: I sense in everything I hear contempt towards me.…Sometimes I think of renting a small room in Basel, visiting you now and then and attending lectures.  Sometimes I think of doing the opposite: of driving my solitude and resignation to the ultimate limit and – The ground of this violent reaction was, as other letters but especially Zarathustra show, the realization he was back in solitude and that he was going to stay there.  With the benefit of hindsight we can see that by the turn of the year 1882–83 there had been assembled in Nietzsche the material for an explosion of some sort – or rather, as we shall discover, an eruption .  Intellectually, emotionally and physically he was all but exhausted; but the ‘ideas’ of the summer of 1881 as they had received tentative expression in the fourth book of The Gay Science are preliminary rumblings which indicate what is coming.  In January – ‘as a result of ten absolutely fresh and cheerful January days’ – the tension broke, inhibition gave way, and the first part of Zarathustra came furiously out.  ‘Has anyone at the end of the nineteenth century a distinct conception of what poets of strong ages called inspiration?’ he asked in Ecce Homo, apropos of Zarathustra .  If not, I will describe it.  – If one had the slightest residue of superstition left in one, one would hardly be able to set aside the idea that one is merely incarnation, merely mouthpiece, merely medium of overwhelming forces.  The concept of revelation, in the sense that something suddenly, with unspeakable certainty and subtlety, becomes viable , audible, something that shakes and overturns one to the depths, simply describes the fact.  One hears, one does not seek; one takes, one does not ask who gives; a thought flashes up like lightning, with necessity, unfalteringly formed – I have never had any choice.  An ecstasy whose tremendous tension sometimes discharges itself in a flood of tears, while one’s steps now involuntarily rush along, now involuntarily lag;…a depth of happiness in which the most painful and gloomy things appear, not as an antithesis, but as conditioned, demanded, as a necessary colour within such a superfluity of light;…Everything is in the highest degree involuntary but takes place as in a tempest of a feeling of freedom, of absoluteness, of power, of divinity.  The involuntary nature of image, of metaphor is the most remarkable thing of all; one no longer has any idea what is image, what metaphor, everything presents itself as the readiest, the truest, the simplest means of expression.  It really does seem, to allude to an expression of Zarathustra’s, as if the things themselves approached and offered themselves as metaphors…This is my experience of inspiration; I do not doubt that one has to go back thousands of years to find anyone who could say to me ‘it is mine also’.  Zarathustra again emerges from his ten-year solitude, but now the mankind to whom he wants to address himself rejects him and he turns from it; subsequently he deserts even the chosen few who have remained with him and goes back into solitude.  His message to mankind is: I teach you the Superman .  Man is something that should be overcome.  And: The Superman is the meaning of the earth.  Let your will say: The Superman shall be the meaning of the earth.  And: All gods are dead: now we want the Superman to live – let this be our last will one day at the great noontide! Then: A table of values hangs over every people.  Behold, it is the table of its overcomings; behold, it is the voice of its will to power.  And (in the second part, written in a similar state of excitement in the following June and July): Of Self-Overcoming …Where I found a living creature, there I found will to power…And life itself told me this secret: ‘Behold,’ it said, ‘I am that which must overcome itself again and again ….  Where there is perishing and the falling of leaves, behold, there life sacrifices itself – for the sake of power!…And you too, enlightened man, are only a path and footstep of my will: truly, my will to power walks with the feet of your will to truth!…The living creature values many things higher than life itself; yet out of this evaluation itself speaks – the will to power!’… And (in the third part, written in a state of even greater excitement in January 1884): O my Will!…Preserve me from all petty victories!…That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide…a bow eager for its arrow, an arrow eager for its star – a star, ready and ripe in its noontide, glowing, transpierced…Spare me for one great victory! And: Sing and bubble over, O Zarathustra, heal your soul with new songs, so that you may bear your great destiny…behold, you are the teacher of the eternal recurrence …And if you should die now, O Zarathustra: behold, we know too what you would then say to yourself…‘Now I die and decay…and in an instant I shall be nothingness…But the complex of causes in which I am entangled will recur – it will create me again!…I shall return… not to a new life or a better life or a similar life: I shall return eternally to this identical and self-same life…to teach once more the eternal recurrence of all things, to speak once more the teaching of the great noontide of earth and man, to tell man of the Superman once more… Finally: O Man! Attend! What does deep midnight’s voice contend? ‘I slept my sleep, And now awake at dreaming’s end: The world is deep, Deeper than day can comprehend.  Deep is its woe, Joy – deeper than heart’s agony: Woe says: Fade! Go! But all joy wants eternity, –wants deep, deep, deep eternity!’ And, in an immense expansion of this poem, written a year later: Did you ever say Yes to one joy? O my friends, then you said Yes to all woe as well.  All things are chained and entwined together, all things are in love; if you ever wanted one moment twice, if you ever said: ‘You please me, happiness, instant, moment!’ then you wanted everything to return! you wanted everything anew, everything eternal, everything chained, entwined together, everything in love, O that is how you loved the world, you everlasting men, loved it eternally, and for all time: and you say even to woe: ‘Go, but return!’ For all joy wants – eternity ! The Superman, the will to the Superman, the will to power and self-overcoming.  Live dangerously! Amor fati , eternal recurrence, total affirmation of life.  The great noontide.  These are the slogans, the ‘signs’, by which Nietzsche surmounted his nihilism and resolved his crisis.  4 Let’s now try to get to the heart of this book and discover the real meaning of its central concepts.  What is truth? said jesting Pilate; and would not stay for an answer.  If he had stayed, what answer would he have received? There cannot be any doubt: Jesus would have said: I am the truth.  This too is Zarathustra’s answer to the question ‘what is truth?’ For what, at this level, is truth, ‘the truth’? Isn’t it the discovery that no truth is discoverable except the truth which you yourself are? that there is no truth (sense, meaning) in the world except the truth (sense, meaning) you yourself give it ? that ‘truth’ is a concept belonging to the human mind and will and that apart from the human mind and will there is no such thing as ‘truth’? finally, that the resolute determination that your own truth shall be the truth is the sole origin of ‘the truth’ on earth? To give life a meaning: that has been the grand endeavour of all who have preached ‘truth’; for unless life is given a meaning it has none.  At this level, truth is not something that can be proved or disproved: it is something which you determine upon , which, in the language of the old psychology, you will .  It is not something waiting to be discovered, something to which you submit or at which you halt: it is something you create , it is the expression of a particular kind of life and being which has, in you, ventured to assert itself.  Thus Zarathustra declares: ‘The Superman is the meaning of the earth.  Let your will say: The Superman shall be the meaning of the earth.’ He is a prophet, not of the truth that is , but of the truth that shall be .  What determines the nature of ‘truth’? The nature of the I which asserts ‘ I am the truth’.  Why truth, and not rather untruth or indifference to truth? Because each particular life and being needs a fortress within which to preserve and protect itself and from which to reach out in search of aggrandizement and more power, and truth is this fortress.  Or, as life says to thinking mankind: ‘my will to power walks with the feet of your will to truth.’ What then ultimately is the answer to Pilate’s question? It is: truth is will to power.  Thus – by my reading at any rate – spoke Zarathustra.  The great need, the ‘one thing needful’, was to overcome the nihilistic devaluation of life and man which had followed the destruction of the metaphysical world (the ‘death of God’).  This devaluation had been effected chiefly by a psychological theory, namely the theory that primitive drives can be sublimated , so that distinctively human qualities, ‘humane’ qualities, can be understood as sublimated forms of drives which mankind has in common with the animals.  The motive for formulating such a theory was the need to account for what is distinctively human without recourse to the metaphysical or supernatural.  From a very large number of experiments, two primitive drives emerged as dominant: the desire for power and the emotion of fear.  And when Nietzsche came to understand fear as the feeling of the absence of power , he was left with a single motivating principle for all human actions: the will to power.  Sublimated will to power was now the Ariadne’s thread tracing the way out of the labyrinth of nihilism.  ‘A table of values’ – i.e.  a morality – ‘hangs over every people’: it is the table of the self-imposed commands which have turned a herd and rabble into a nation: primitive aggression has been directed back upon itself, sublimated into self -control.  When the same thing happens in an individual, when he imposes commands upon himself, and obeys them, so that he too as it were changes from a rabble into a nation, the result is ‘the Superman’, the man who is master of himself .  But to master oneself is the hardest of all tasks, that which requires the greatest amount of power: he who can do it has experienced the greatest increase in power, and if (as Nietzsche later says explicitly but here implies) happiness (in Zarathustra ‘joy’) is the feeling that power increases, that a resistance is overcome, then the Superman will be the happiest man and, as such, the meaning and justification of existence.  Through continual increase of power to transmute the chaos of life into a continual self-overcoming of life and thus to experience in an ever greater degree the joy which is synonymous with this self-overcoming: that would now be the meaning of life – for joy is to Nietzsche, as it is to commonsense, the one thing that requires no justification, that is its own justification.  He who had attained that joy would affirm life and love it however much pain it contained, because he would know that ‘all things are chained and entwined together’ and that everything is therefore part of a whole which he must accept as a whole .  To express this feeling of life-affirmation Nietzsche formulated a theorem of ‘the eternal recurrence of the same events’ to which he gave rhapsodic expression in Zarathustra .  To be sure, only the Superman could be so well-disposed towards his life as to want it again and again for ever: but that precisely is the reason for willing his creation.  The joy of the Superman in being as he is, now and ever, is the ultimate sublimation of the will to power and the final overcoming of an otherwise inexorable and inevitable nihilism.  5 These conceptions constitute the heart of Thus Spoke Zarathustra ; these, and the extended hymn to solitude and individuality to which the book owes its peculiar tone and pathos.  I have described the process of their formation as an eruption; what I mean is an eruption from the subconscious of ideas belonging to Nietzsche’s earliest years, an eruption brought about by the very fact that at this time he had arrived at the end of the path which led away from them.  He could go no further forward, so he had to go back.  But since he likewise could not retract what he had been asserting for the previous five years, these earliest ideas which now came up again came up transformed and distorted almost beyond recognition.  What is involved is the operation of something like the psychic censor of psychoanalysis: so that I doubt whether Nietzsche himself was altogether aware of the provenance of the grand and grandiose positive conceptions to the elaboration of which he began to apply his exceptional rhetorical gifts.  These ‘earliest ideas’ are of course Christian, and specifically Lutheran.  The teaching of Lutheran Pietism is before all that the events of life are divinely willed and that it is thus impiety to desire that things should be different from what they are: * but the other tenets of Christian belief are naturally also firmly adhered to by Lutherans.  Here, without more ado, are what I take to be the Christian parallels to the conceptions which dominated Nietzsche’s mind during the period from the summer of 1881 to the year January 1883–January 1884, when they found full expression in Zarathustra , Amor fati : Lutheran acceptance of the events of life as divinely willed, with the consequent affirmation of life as such as divine , as a product of the divine will, and the implication that to hate life is blasphemous.  Eternal recurrence : as a consequence of amor fati the extremest formula of life-affirmation, strongly influenced by the Christian concepts of eternal life and the unalterable nature of God: what is, ‘is now and ever shall be, world without end.’ Will to power : divine grace.  The clue to the connexion is the concept of ‘self-overcoming’, which is one of Nietzsche’s terms for sublimation and the hinge upon which the theory of the will to power turns from being a nihilist to a positive and joyful conception.  The corresponding Christian conception is that of unregenerate nature redeemed by the force of God’s grace.  In both conceptions the central idea is that a certain inner quality (grace/sublimated will to power) elevates man (or some men) above the rest of nature.  The pathos with which ‘will to power’ is invested derives to some extent from ‘Thy will be done’ and the juxtaposition of ‘power’ and ‘glory’, together with the Christian doctrine that to God’s will all things are possible.  Live dangerously! : ‘Take up thy Cross, and follow me’ -Christian deprecation of the easy life.  Great noontide : the Second Coming, the Last Judgement, the division of the sheep from the goats, the wheat from the chaff.  Superman : God as creator and ‘highest being’, the ‘Son of Man’ as God, man as the receptacle of divine grace who rejoices at the idea of eternity: the embodiment and actualization of everything regarded as desirable.  What the Christian says of God, Nietzsche says in very nearly the same words of the Superman, namely: ‘Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever.’ 6 Zarathustra’s posture as inspired prophet and reader of riddles would itself suggest an atavism in Nietzsche’s mind even if we were unable clearly to identify the earlier stage to which it had reverted.  But it was an atavism whose effect was curative, like an electrical storm that breaks up the cloud and bad weather which has caused it.  The theme of joy in existence, of the self-sufficiency-in-joy of the sovereign individual, of this joyful self-sufficiency as the aim and meaning of life is what finally reigns as the paramount theme of the book: and this theme derives, not from the grand but ultimately overpowering and stifling conceptions of Christianity, but from someone Nietzsche was later to celebrate as an actualization of the Superman: Goethe.  When the sound and wholesome nature of man acts as an entirety, when he feels himself in the world as in a grand, beautiful, worthy and worthwhile whole, when this harmonious comfort affords him a pure, untrammeled delight: then the universe, if it could be sensible of itself, would shout for joy at having attained its goal and wonder at the pinnacle of its own essence and evolution.  For what end is served by all the expenditure of suns and planets and moons, of stars and Milky Ways, of comets and nebula, of worlds evolving and passing away, if at last a happy man does not involuntarily rejoice in his existence? This passage, from Goethe’s essay on Winckelmann (1805), which Nietzsche certainly knew, could stand as the motto of Thus Spoke Zarathustra .  It is the distillation of the great benevolent spirit of Goethe, a spirit Nietzsche called ‘dionysian’ and with which, for all its tremendous difference in emphasis, Zarathustra is in accordance.  7 I now offer a brief survey of Zarathustra chapter by chapter and comment on a few individual points about which the reader may like some enlightenment.  Zarathustra ( Greek Zoroastres) is the founder of the ancient Persian religion, and the book with which he is credited, the Zend-Avesta, is its Bible.  Scholars of the nineteenth century questioned whether Zarathustra existed, as they questioned whether Homer existed (probably a side-effect of ‘evolutionism’): both are now rehabilitated.  Nietzsche protested at the dissolution of Homer: ‘We gain nothing with our theory of the poetising soul of the people, we are always referred back to the poetical individual’ (Homer and Classical Philology , 1869).  So with Zarathustra.  He is conjectured to have lived in the seventh century B.C.  The heart of his religion is a conflict between Ahura Mazda (Ormuzd), the god of light and good, and Angra Mainyu (Ahriman), the god of darkness and evil.  Nietzsche’s explanation of why he appropriated his name for his own hero: I have not been asked, as I should have been asked, what the name Zarathustra means in precisely my mouth, in the mouth of the first immoralist: for what constitutes the tremendous uniqueness of that Persian in history is precisely the opposite of this.  Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle between good and evil the actual wheel in the working of things: the translation of morality into the realm of metaphysics, as force, cause, end-in-itself, is his work.  But this question is itself at bottom its own answer.  Zarathustra created this most fateful of errors, morality: consequently he must also be the first to recognise it.  Not only has he had longer and greater experience here than any other thinker…what is more important is that Zarathustra is more truthful than any other thinker.  His teaching, and his alone, upholds truthfulness as the supreme virtue.…To tell the truth and to shoot well with arrows : that is Persian virtue.  – Have I been understood? The self-overcoming of morality through truthfulness, the self-overcoming of the moralist into his opposite – into me – that is what the name Zarathustra means in my mouth.  (Em Homo) .  The book is very loosely constructed, but it does possess direction and a plot of sorts.  PART ONE.  Prologue , (1) Zarathustra comes down out of solitude, announces (2) that God is dead and (3) preaches God’s successor, the Superman.  Mankind fails to understand him, even when he (4) expounds his beatitudes (cf.  Matthew 5, 3–11) and (5) appeals to their pride by describing the Superman’s antithesis, the ‘Ultimate Man’, the man who sacrifices the future to his own present.  The (6) overtoppling of the tightrope walker (mankind balanced over an abyss) by the buffoon (Zarathustra himself perhaps, an unannounced attraction) brings home to Zarathustra (7) that human existence is ‘uncanny’ (cf.  the second chorus of Antigone : ‘Many things are uncanny, but none more uncanny than man’), and after a bad night (8) he resolves (9) to desert the market place and speak his message only to the individual.  The twenty-two ‘discourses’ which follow are addressed by Zarathustra to his band of disciples.  Five of the discourses are enclosed in a miniature dramatic scene, the remainder are direct address.  Each is an epitome of Nietzsche’s views on the subject in question: 1: the ‘education of the spirit’: self-discipline, independence, creativity (for another account, in quite different language, see Human, All Too Human , Preface to volume I (1886), sections 3–7); 2: ‘negative virtue’, virtue which consists in not doing wrong and which has as its reward ‘peace of soul’; 3: ‘the metaphysical world’ (including a renunciation of his earlier view ( The Birth of Tragedy , 1872) that aesthetic values are the only true values); 4: the relation between mind and body (a prologue to the theory of the will to power); 5: the nature of virtue; 6: its opposite, the ‘criminal instinct’; 7: aphorisms on authorship, happiness and laughter (introduces ‘the Spirit of Gravity’); 8: ‘nobility of soul’; 9: pessimism; 10: ‘Live dangerously!’; II: the State; 12: nausea at mankind, ‘l’ enfer, c’est les autres’; 13: sensuality and its disguises; 14: how to be a true friend; 15: the relativity of moral values (introduces the will to power); 16: critique of ‘love thy neighbour as thyself’; 17: the need for solitude and the danger of solitude; 18: the nature of women; 19: the nature of justice; 20: bad marriages and good ones; 21: bad deaths and good ones.  Over all these discourses hovers Zarathustra’s dictum ‘Man is something that must be overcome.’ The final chapter reverts to the Prologue, to the death of God and the need for the Superman to give significance to the earth; Zarathustra extols the magnanimous man, the man so full of strength and well-being he bestows gifts on others because he has to, and exhorts his disciples to independence.  Then he leaves them.  PART TWO.  Much more various than Part One.  Zarathustra is more of a dramatic character and eight of the twenty-two chapters involve action.  1: corresponds to the Prologue of Part One: Zarathustra’s return; 2: a much-expanded recapitulation of the ‘God is dead’ theme, and the reintroduction of the Superman as God’s successor; 3: pity for mankind and the need to overcome it; 4: organized religion and the priesthood; 5: another essay on virtue, true and false; 6: another essay on nausea at mankind and how to avoid it; 7: another essay on justice and a polemic against revengefulness disguised as justice; 8: philosophy, true and false; 9–11: prose poems, autobiographical, for the most part fretful, plaintive, disgruntled (cf.  Part Three 3–4 and 14–16); 12: the will to power in full; 13: resumes and completes 8; 14: critique of contemporary culture; 16: critique of the contemplative life and the search for ‘pure knowledge’; 16: critique of the scholarly life; 17: critique of the artistic nature; 18: dramatically, the book’s turning-point.  A discourse on revolution and anarchism is allied to an uncommon amount of action and a fantastical story told by sailors.  Zarathustra’s disciples ‘hardly listened’ to his discourse, we are told, because of their anxiety to repeat the sailors’ story, the point of which is that Zarathustra’s alter ego has been seen flying through the air crying ‘It is time! It is high time!’ ‘For what is it high time?’ Zarathustra asks himself when he learns this: the answer (suppressed for the moment but henceforward never absent from his mind) is: ‘Time to declare the eternal recurrence.’; 19: continues the fantastical atmosphere of 18 and intensifies it into nightmare; Zarathustra is now in a nervous and depressed condition very different from the state of ebullient optimism which has chiefly characterized him hitherto; a ‘dark night of the soul’, which persists into Part Three; 20: a discourse on ‘great men’ leads to reflexions on the nature of will in the midst of which Zarathustra is struck dumb when he realizes the implications of what he is saying for the theory of eternal recurrence; 21: on the desirability of masks – a beautifully shaped chapter, in this respect perhaps the finest; but it belongs in spirit earlier in the book, it interrupts the steady descent from 18 to 22, in which Zarathustra, as the consequence of a second nightmare which robs him of all self-confidence and almost of self-control, again deserts his disciples, this time, however, in a mood of profound misery, and this time for good.  PART THREE.  For the most part Zarathustra is alone and addressing himself.  Earlier themes are taken up and woven into a texture which sometimes grows too tight.  Imagery becomes clotted at times.  But the intensity of expression aimed at is superbly achieved and maintained.  1: Zarathustra has just left his disciples and is making his way home, his depression still upon him; 2: on board ship, he expounds the eternal recurrence as a riddle and in language which recalles the nightmare of Part Two 18; although all is still shrouded in obscurity and mystery, that he has now brought himself to raise the veil even to this limited extent is sufficient to restore him to his normal cheerfulness; 3 and 4: prose poems, introspective, cheerful, calm; half way between the melancholy of Part Two 9–11 and the Dionysian ecstasy of Part Three 14–16; 5: back on firm land, Zarathustra experiences again his familiar nausea at mankind; 6: self-portrait of Zarathustra as a solitary; 7: extended exegesis of the text ‘May looking away be my only form of negation!’; 8: polemic against piety; 9: Zarathustra arrives back at his cave: a hymn to solitude; 10: a model ‘revaluation’ of three vices; n: exhortation to cheerfulness; 12–16: the climax of the book, a supreme exhibition of the sustained intellectual passion which gives Nietzsche his place among the world’s great men.  12 is a re-exposition in brief of Zarathustra’s teachings, up to but not including the theory of the eternal recurrence, which is reserved for 13, in which the theory is at last stated in full and without disguise, and joyfully accepted and embraced.  With this act Zarathustra’s self-education reaches its appointed end.  The fulfilment is celebrated with a trilogy of prose poems, 14–16, of great exuberance and intensity.  At this culmination of his course, Zarathustra is, as aforesaid, entirely alone, so that when he wishes to give vent to his feelings of unbounded joy and gratitude in dithyrambic poetry there is no one to whom he can address these dithyrambs except himself.  Thus 14 is addressed to his own soul, 15 to the life he feels within him, 16 to himself in his future reincarnation.  The eternity referred to in 16 is of course the eternal recurrence, and the child he wants to have by ‘eternity’ is – himself.  PART FOUR.  When, in January 1884, he closed his book with Seven Seals, Nietzsche thought Zarathustra was finished.  But in the following winter he took up the theme again, and planned a further three parts.  In the first of them, Zarathustra is visited by sundry ‘higher men’ who, as a consequence of Zarathustra’s instruction, become conscious of their inadequacy.  At the conclusion of this part Zarathustra receives the call to go out into the world again, and in the following part he accumulates a large following, to whom he preaches his now triumphant message.  In the final part he dies, although Nietzsche could not decide in what manner.  Of these three new parts only the first was written, slowly and with interruptions, in the winter of 1884–85.  Nietzsche had it privately printed but withheld it from publication, and it first appeared, as ‘the Fourth and Last Part’ of Zarathustra in 1892, as part of the first collected edition of Nietzsche.  Stylistically, Part Four is quite different from the earlier parts and on a lower level of inspiration.  The ‘higher men’ are at once types and individuals.  The gloomy prophet is Schopenhauer.  The two kings are any kings.  The conscientious man of the spirit is probably Darwin, although any scientific specialist would do.  The sorcerer is Wagner (the sorcerer’s poems are parodies of Wagner’s later poetic manner).  The last pope is of course (as yet) imaginary.  The ugliest man and the shadow are representations of the atheist and the freethinker respectively.  The voluntary beggar is either the Buddha or Tolstoy.  The eternal recurrence remains in the background, but emerges at the conclusion, where it receives its most sonorous and ecstatic affirmation.  June 1969 R.J.H.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Manly Prudence I T is not the height, it is the abyss that is terrible! The abyss where the glance plunges downward and the hand grasps upward .  There the heart grows giddy through its twofold will.  Ah, friends, have you, too, divined my heart’s twofold will? That my glance plunges into the heights and that my hand wants to hold on to the depths and lean there – that, that is my abyss and my danger.  My will clings to mankind, I bind myself to mankind with fetters, because I am drawn up to the Superman: for my other will wants to draw me up to the Superman.  That my hand may not quite lose its belief in firmness: that is why I live blindly among men, as if I did not recognize them.  I do not recognize you men: this darkness and consolation has often spread around me.  I sit at the gateway and wait for every rogue and ask: Who wants to deceive me? This is my first manly prudence: I let myself be deceived so as not to be on guard against deceivers.  Ah, if I were on guard against men, how could men be an anchor for my ball? It would be torn upward and away too easily! This providence lies over my fate: I have to be without foresight.  And he who does not want to die of thirst among men must learn to drink out of all glasses; and he who wants to stay clean among men must know how to wash himself even with dirty water.  And to console myself I often spoke thus: ‘Well then! Come on, old heart! A misfortune failed to harm you: enjoy that as your – good fortune!’ This, however, is my second manly prudence: I am more considerate to the vain than to the proud.  Is wounded vanity not the mother of all tragedies? But where pride is wounded there surely grows up something better than pride.  If life is to be pleasant to watch, its play must be well acted: for that, however, good actors are needed.  I found all vain people to be good actors: they act and desire that others shall want to watch them – all their spirit is in this desire.  They act themselves, they invent themselves; I like to watch life in their vicinity – it cures melancholy.  I am considerate to the vain because they are physicians to my melancholy and hold me fast to mankind as to a play.  And further: who can estimate the full depth of the vain man’s modesty! I love and pity him on account of his modesty.  He wants to learn belief in himself from you; he feeds upon your glances, he eats praise out of your hands.  He believes even your lies when you lie favourably to him: for his heart sighs in its depths: ‘What am I ?’ And if the virtue that is unconscious of itself be the true virtue: well, the vain man is unconscious of his modesty! This, however, is my third manly prudence: I do not let your timorousness spoil my pleasure at the sight of the wicked .  I am happy to see the marvels the hot sun hatches: tigers and palm trees and rattle-snakes.  Among men, too, there is a fine brood of the hot sun and much that is marvellous in the wicked.  Indeed, as your wisest man did not seem so very wise to me, so I found that human wickedness, too, did not live up to its reputation.  And I often shook my head and asked: Why go on rattling, you rattle-snakes? Truly, there is still a future, even for evil! And the hottest South has not yet been discovered for mankind.  How many a thing is now called grossest wickedness which is only twelve feet broad and three months long! One day, however, greater dragons will come into the world.  For, that the Superman may not lack his dragon, the super-dragon worthy of him, much hot sunshine must yet burn upon damp primeval forests! Your wild cats must have become tigers and your poison-toads crocodiles: for the good huntsman shall have a good hunt! And truly, you good and just! There is much in you that is laughable and especially your fear of him who was formerly called the ‘Devil’! Your souls are so unfamiliar with what is great that the Superman would be fearful to you in his goodness! And you wise and enlightened men, you would flee from the burning sun of wisdom in which the Superman joyfully bathes his nakedness! You highest men my eyes have encountered! This is my doubt of you and my secret laughter: I think you would call my Superman – a devil! Alas, I grew weary of these highest and best men: from their ‘heights’ I longed to go up, out, away to the Superman! A horror overcame me when I saw these best men naked: then there grew for me the wings to soar away into distant futures.  Into most distant futures, into more southerly Souths than artist ever dreamed of: thither where gods are ashamed of all clothes! But I want to see you disguised, you neighbours and fellow-men, and well-dressed and vain and worthy as ‘the good and just’.  And I myself will sit among you disguised, so that I may misunderstand you and myself: that, in fact, is my last manly prudence.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Old and Young Women ‘W HY do you slink so shyly through the twilight, Zarathustra? And what are you hiding so carefully under your cloak? ‘Is it a treasure someone has given you? Or a child that has been born to you? Or are you now taking the way of thieves yourself, friend of the wicked?’ Truly, my brother! (said Zarathustra) it is a treasure that has been given me: it is a little truth that I carry.  But it is as unruly as a little child, and if I do not stop its mouth it will cry too loudly.  Today as I was going my way alone, at the hour when the sun sets, a little old woman encountered me and spoke thus to my soul: ‘Zarathustra has spoken much to us women, too, but he has never spoken to us about woman.’ And I answered her: ‘One should speak about women only to men.’ ‘Speak to me too of woman,’ she said; ‘I am old enough soon to forget it.’ And I obliged the little old woman and spoke to her thus: Everything about woman is a riddle, and everything about woman has one solution: it is called pregnancy.  For the woman, the man is a means: the end is always the child.  But what is the woman for the man? The true man wants two things: danger and play.  For that reason he wants woman, as the most dangerous plaything.  Man should be trained for war and woman for the recreation of the warrior: all else is folly.  The warrior does not like fruit that is too sweet.  Therefore he likes woman; even the sweetest woman is still bitter.  Woman understands children better than a man, but man is more childlike than woman.  A child is concealed in the true man: it wants to play.  Come, women, discover the child in man! Let woman be a plaything, pure and fine like a precious stone illumined by the virtues of a world that does not yet exist.  Let the flash of a star glitter in your level Let your hope be: ‘May I bear the Superman!’ Let there be bravery in your love! With your love you should attack him who inspires you with fear.  Let your honour be in your love! Woman has understood little otherwise about honour.  But let this be your honour: always to love more than you are loved and never to be second in this.  Let man fear woman when she loves.  Then she bears every sacrifice and every other thing she accounts valueless.  Let man fear woman when she hates: for man is at the bottom of his soul only wicked, but woman is base.  Whom does woman hate most? – Thus spoke the iron to the magnet: ‘I hate you most, because you attract me, but are not strong enough to draw me towards you.’ The man’s happiness is: I will.  The woman’s happiness is: He will.  ‘Behold, now the world has become perfect!’ – thus thinks every woman when she obeys with all her love.  And woman has to obey and find a depth for her surface.  Woman’s nature is surface, a changeable, stormy film upon shallow waters.  But a man’s nature is deep, its torrent roars in subterranean caves: woman senses its power but does not comprehend it.  Then the little old woman answered me: ‘Zarathustra has said many nice things, especially for those who are young enough for them.  ‘It is strange, Zarathustra knows little of women and yet he is right about them! Is this because with women nothing is impossible? ‘And now accept as thanks a little truth 11 am certainly old enough for it! ‘Wrap it up and stop its mouth: otherwise it will cry too loudly, this little truth!’ ‘Give me your little truth, woman!’ I said.  And thus spoke the little old woman: ‘Are you visiting women? Do not forget your whip!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Conversation with the Kings 1 Z ARATHUSTRA had not been going an hour through his mountains and forests when all at once he saw a strange procession.  Along just that path that he was going down came two kings, adorned with crowns and purple sashes and bright as flamingos: they drove before them a laden ass.  ‘What do these kings want in my kingdom?’ said Zarathustra in astonishment to his heart, and quickly concealed himself behind a bush.  But as the kings drew abreast of him, he said, half aloud like someone talking to himself: ‘Strange! Strange! I cannot make this out! I see two kings – and only one ass!’ Then the two kings halted, smiled, gazed at the place from which the voice had come, and then looked one another in the face.  ‘No doubt people think such things as that at home, too,’ said the king on the right, ‘but they do not utter them.’ The king on the left shrugged his shoulders and answered: ‘It is probably a goat-herd.  Or a hermit who has lived too long among trees and rocks.  For no company at all also corrupts good manners.’ ‘Good manners?’ replied the other king indignantly and bitterly.  ‘What is it we are avoiding, then? Is it not “good manners”? Our “good company”? ‘Truly, better to live among hermits and goat-herds than with our gilded, false, painted rabble – although it calls itself “good company”, ‘although it calls itself “nobility”.  But there everything is false and rotten, most of all the blood, thanks to old, evil diseases and worse quacks.  ‘I think the finest and dearest man today is a healthy peasant, uncouth, cunning, obstinate, enduring: that is the noblest type today.  ‘The peasant is the finest man today; and the peasantry should be master! But ours is the kingdom of the rabble – I no longer let myself be taken in.  Rabble, however, means: hotchpotch.  ‘Rabble-hotchpotch: in that everything is mixed up with everything else, saint and scoundrel and gentleman and Jew and every beast out of Noah’s Ark.  ‘Good manners! Everything is false and rotten with us.  Nobody knows how to be respectful any more: it is from precisely this that we are running away.  They are honey-mouthed, importunate dogs, they gild palm-leaves.  ‘It is this disgust that chokes me, that we kings ourselves have become false, arrayed and disguised in the old, yellowed pomp of our grandfathers, show-pieces for the stupidest and the craftiest and whoever today traffics with power! ‘We are not the first of them – yet we have to pretend to be: we have at last become tired and disgusted with this deception.  ‘Now we are avoiding the mob, all these ranters and scribbling-blue bottles, the stench of shopkeepers, the struggles of ambition, the foul breath: faugh, to live among the mob, ‘faugh, to pretend to be the first among the mob! Ah, disgust! disgust! disgust! What do we kings matter any more!’ ‘Your old illness is assailing you,’ the king on the left said at this point, ‘disgust is assailing you, my poor brother.  But you know that someone can overhear us.’ Hereupon Zarathustra, who had kept his ears and eyes open to these speeches, rose from his hiding-place, stepped towards the kings and began: ‘He who has overheard you, he who likes to overhear you, O kings, is called Zarathustra.  ‘I am Zarathustra, who once said: “What do kings matter any longer!” Forgive me, but I was glad when you said to one another: “What do we kings matter!” ‘This, however, is my kingdom and dominion: what might you be seeking in my kingdom? But perhaps on your way you have found what I am seeking : that is, the Higher Man.’ When the kings heard this they beat their breasts and said in a single voice: ‘We have been recognized! ‘With the sword of these words you have cut through the thickest darkness of our hearts.  You have discovered our distress, for behold! we are on our way to find the Higher Man – ‘the man who is higher than we: although we are kings.  We are leading this ass to him.  For the Highest Man shall also be the highest lord on earth.  ‘There is no harder misfortune in all human destiny than when the powerful of the earth are not also the first men.  Then everything becomes false and awry and monstrous.  ‘And when they are even the last men and more beast than man, then the value of the rabble rises higher and higher and at last the rabble-virtue says: Behold, I alone am virtue!’ ‘What do I hear?’ answered Zarathustra; ‘what wisdom from kings! I am enchanted, and truly, I already feel the urge to compose a verse about it: ‘even if it should be a verse not suited to everyone’s ears.  I long ago unlearned consideration for long ears.  Very well! Come on! (But here it happened that the ass, too, found speech: it said clearly and maliciously ‘Ye-a’.) ‘Once on a time – ’twas A.D.  One, I think – Thus spoke the Sybil, drunken without drink: “How bad things go! Decay! Decay! Ne’er sank the world so low! Rome is now a harlot and a brothel too, Rome’s Caesar’s a beast, and God himself – a Jew!”’ 2 The kings were delighted with these lines of Zarathustra’s; and the king on the right said: ‘O Zarathustra, how well we did to come out and see you! ‘For your enemies have shown us your image in their mirror, from which you gazed with the grimace of a devil and with mocking laughter, so that we were afraid of you.  ‘But what good was it! Again and again you stung our ears and hearts with your sayings.  Then at last we said: What does it matter how he looks! ‘We must hear him, him who teaches: You should love peace as a means to new wars and a short peace more than a long! ‘No one ever spoke such warlike words: What is good? To be brave is good.  It is the good war that hallows every cause.  ‘O Zarathustra, at such words the blood of our fathers stirred in our bodies: it was like spring speaking to old wine-casks.  ‘Our fathers loved life when swords were crossed like red-flecked serpents; they thought all suns of peace faint and feeble, but the long peace made them ashamed.  ‘How they sighed, our fathers, when they saw resplendent, parched swords upon the wall! Like them, they thirsted for war.  For a sword wants to drink blood and sparkles with its desire.’ As the kings thus eagerly talked and babbled of the happiness of their fathers, Zarathustra was overcome by no small desire to mock their eagerness: for they were apparently very peaceable kings that he saw before him, with aged, refined faces.  But he controlled himself.  ‘Very well!’ he said, ‘yonder leads the way to Zarathustra’s cave; and this day shall have a long evening! But now a cry of distress calls me hurriedly away from you.  ‘My cave will be honoured if kings would sit and wait in it: but, to be sure, you will have to wait a long time! ‘But really! What does it matter! Where today does one learn to wait better than in courts? And the whole virtue still remaining to kings – is it not today called: being able to wait!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Second Dance Song 1 L ATELY I gazed into your eyes, O Life: I saw gold glittering in your eyes of night – my heart stood still with delight: I saw a golden bark glittering upon dark waters, a submerging, surging, re-emerging golden tossing bark! At my feet, my dancing-mad feet, you threw a glance, a laughing, questioning, melting tossing glance: Twice only did you raise your castanets in your little hands – then my feet were already tossing in a mad dance.  My heels raised themselves, my toes listened for what you should propose: for the dancer wears his ears – in his toes! I sprang to your side: then you fled back from my spring; towards me the tongues of your fleeing, flying hair came hissing! Away from you and from your serpents did I retire: then at once you stood, half turned, your eyes full of desire.  With your crooked smile – you teach me crooked ways, upon crooked ways my feet learn – guile! I fear you when you are near, I love you when you are far; your fleeing allures me, your seeking secures me: I suffer, but for you what would I not gladly endure! For you whose coldness inflames, whose hatred seduces, whose flight constrains, whose mockery – induces: who would not hate you, great woman who binds us, en-winds us, seduces us, seeks us, finds us I Who would not love you, you innocent, impatient, wind-swift, child-eyed sinner! Where now do you take me, you unruly paragon? And again you forsake me, you sweet, ungrateful tomboy! I dance after you, I follow you even when only the slightest traces of you linger.  Where are you? Give me your hand I Or just a finger! Here are caves and thickets: we shall go astray! Stop! Stand still! Do you not see owls and bats flitting away? Would you befool me? You bat! You owl! Where are we? Did you learn from the dogs thus to bark and howl? Your little white teeth you sweetly bare at me, from under your curly little mane your wicked eyes stare at me! This is a dance over dale and hill: I am the hunter – will you be my hound or will you be my kill? Now beside me! And quickly, you wicked rover I Now spring up! And across! – Help! In springing! myself have gone over! Oh see me lying, you wanton companion, and begging for grace! I long to follow you in – a sweeter chase! – love’s chase through flowery bushes, still and dim! Or there beside the lake, where goldfishes dance and swim! Are you now weary? There yonder are sheep and evening: let us end our pursuit: is it not sweet to sleep when the shepherd plays his flute? Are you so very weary? I will carry you there, just let your arms sink! And if you are thirsty – I should have something, but you would not like it to drink! – Oh this accursed, nimble, supple snake and slippery witch! Where have you gone? But on my face I feel from your hand two spots and blotches itch! I am truly weary of being your shepherd, always sheepish and meek! You witch, if I have hitherto sung for you, now for me you shall – shriek! To the rhythm of my whip you shall shriek and trot! Did I forget my whip? – I did not! 2 Then Life answered me thus, keeping her gentle ears closed: ‘O Zarathustra! Do not crack your whip so terribly! You surely know: noise kills thought – and now such tender thoughts are coming to me.  ‘We are both proper ne’er-do-wells and ne’er-do-ills.  Beyond good and evil did we discover our island and our green meadow – we two alone! Therefore we must love one another! ‘And even if we do not love one another from the very heart, do people have to dislike one another if they do not love one another from the very heart? ‘And that I love you and often love you too well, that I know: and the reason is that I am jealous of your Wisdom.  Ah, this crazy old fool, Wisdom! ‘If your Wisdom should one day desert you, alas! then my love would quickly desert you too.’ Thereupon, Life gazed thoughtfully behind her and around her and said gently: ‘O Zarathustra, you are not faithful enough to me! ‘You do not love me nearly as much as you say; I know you are thinking of leaving me soon.  ‘There is an old, heavy, heavy booming bell: it booms out at night up to your cave: ‘when you hear this bell beat the hour at midnight, then you think between one and twelve – ‘you think, O Zarathustra, I know it, you think of leaving me soon!’ ‘Yes,’ I answered hesitatingly, ‘but you also know….’ And I said something into her ear, in the midst of her tangled, yellow, foolish locks.  ‘You know that, O Zarathustra? No one knows that.’ And we gazed at one another and looked out at the green meadow, over which the cool evening was spreading, and wept together.  But then Life was dearer to me than all my Wisdom had ever been.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  3 One! O Man! Attend! Two! What does deep midnight’s voice contend? Three ! ‘I slept my sleep, Four! ‘And now awake at dreaming’s end: Five ! ‘The world is deep, Six! ‘Deeper than day can comprehend.  Seven ! ‘Deep is its woe, Eight! ‘Joy – deeper than heart’s agony: Nine ! ‘Woe says: Fade! Go! Ten! ‘But all joy wants eternity, Eleven! ‘ – wants deep, deep, deep eternity!’ Twelve! Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Sign O N the morning after this night, however, Zarathustra sprang up from his bed, girded his loins, and emerged from his cave, glowing and strong, like a morning sun emerging from behind dark mountains.  ‘Great star,’ he said, as he had said once before, ‘you profound eye of happiness, what would all your happiness be if you did not have those for whom you shine! ‘And if they remained in their rooms while you were already awake and had come, giving and distributing: how angry your proud modesty would be! ‘Very well! they are still asleep, these Higher Men, while I am awake: they are not my rightful companions! It is not for them I am waiting in my mountains.  ‘I want to go to my work, to my day: but they do not understand what are the signs of my morning, my step -is no awakening call for them.  ‘They are still sleeping in my cave, their dream still drinks at my intoxicated songs.  Yet the ear that listens to me , the obeying ear, is missing from them.’ Zarathustra had said this to his heart when the sun rose: then he looked inquiringly aloft, for he heard above him the sharp cry of his eagle.  ‘Very well!’ he cried up, ‘so do I like it, so do I deserve it.  My animals are awake, for I am awake.  ‘My eagle is awake and, like me, does honour to the sun.  With eagle’s claws it reaches out for the new light.  You are my rightful animals: I love you.  ‘But I still lack my rightful men!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra; then, however, he suddenly heard that he was surrounded by countless birds, swarming and fluttering – the whirring of so many wings and the throng about his head, however, were so great that he shut his eyes.  And truly, it was as if a cloud had fallen upon him, a cloud of arrows discharged over a new enemy.  And behold, in this case it was a cloud of love, and over a new friend.  ‘What is happening to me?’ thought Zarathustra, in his astonished heart, and slowly lowered himself on to the great stone that lay beside the exit of his cave.  But, as he was clutching about, above and underneath himself, warding off the tender birds, behold, then something even stranger occurred: for in doing so he clutched unawares a thick, warm mane of hair; at the same time, however, a roar rang out in front of him – the gentle, protracted roar of a lion.  ‘The sign has come ’ said Zarathustra, and his heart was transformed.  And in truth, when it grew clear before him, there lay at his feet a sallow, powerful animal that lovingly pressed its head against his knee and would not leave him, behaving like a dog that has found his old master again.  The doves, however, were no less eager than the lion with their love; and every time a dove glided across the lion’s nose, the lion shook its head and wondered and laughed.  While this was happening, Zarathustra said but one thing: ‘My children are near, my children ’ then he grew quite silent.  His heart, however, was loosened, and tears fell from his eyes down upon his hands.  And he no longer paid attention to anything, and sat there motionless and no longer warding off the animals.  Then the doves flew back and forth and sat upon his shoulder and fondled his white hair and did not weary of tenderness and rejoicing.  The mighty lion, however, continually licked the tears that fell down upon Zarathustra’s hands, roaring and growling shyly as he did so.  Thus did these animals.  All this lasted a long time, or a short time: for, properly speaking, there is no time on earth for such things.  In the meantime, however, the Higher Men in Zarathustra’s cave had awakened and arranged themselves for a procession, that they might go to Zarathustra and offer him their morning greeting: for they had discovered when they awoke that he was no longer among them.  But when they reached the door of the cave, and the sound of their steps preceded them, the lion started violently, suddenly turned away from Zarathustra, and leaped up to the cave, roaring fiercely; the Higher Men, however, when they heard its roaring, all cried out as with a single throat and fled back and in an instant had vanished.  But Zarathustra himself, bewildered and spell-bound, raised himself from his seat, gazed about him, stood there amazed, questioned his heart, recollected, and saw he was alone.  ‘What was it I heard?’ he slowly said at last, ‘what has just happened to me?’ And at once his memory returned and he comprehended in a glance all that had happened between yesterday and today.  ‘This here is the stone,’ he said and stroked his beard, ‘on this did I sit yesterday morning; and here did the prophet come to me, and here I first heard the cry which I heard even now, the great cry of distress.  ‘O you Higher Men, it was of your distress that old prophet prophesied to me yesterday morning, ‘he tried to seduce and tempt me to your distress: O Zarathustra, he said to me, I have come to seduce you to your ultimate sin.  ‘To my ultimate sin?’ cried Zarathustra and laughed angrily at his own words.  ‘What has been reserved for me as my ultimate sin?’ And once more Zarathustra became absorbed in himself and sat himself again on the great stone and meditated.  Suddenly, he leaped up - ‘Pity! Pity for the Higher Man !’ he cried out, and his countenance was transformed into brass.  ‘Very well! That – has had its time! ‘My suffering and my pity – what of them! For do I aspire after happiness? I aspire after my work ! ‘Very well! The lion has come, my children are near, Zarathustra has become ripe, my hour has come! ‘This is my morning, my day begins: rise up now, rise up, great noontide!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and left his cave, glowing and strong, like a morning sun emerging from behind dark mountains.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Bestowing Virtue 1 W HEN Zarathustra had taken leave of the town to which his heart was attached and which was called ‘The Pied Cow’ there followed him many who called themselves his disciples and escorted him.  Thus they came to a cross-road: there Zarathustra told them that from then on he wanted to go alone: for he was a friend of going-alone.  But his disciples handed him in farewell a staff, upon the golden haft of which a serpent was coiled about a sun.  Zarathustra was delighted with the staff and leaned upon it; then he spoke thus to his disciples: Tell me: how did gold come to have the highest value? Because it is uncommon and useless and shining and mellow in lustre; it always bestows itself.  Only as an image of the highest virtue did gold come to have die highest value.  Gold-like gleams the glance of the giver.  Gold-lustre makes peace between moon and sun.  The highest virtue is uncommon and useless, it is shining and mellow in lustre: the highest virtue is a bestowing virtue.  Truly, I divine you well, my disciples, you aspire to the bestowing virtue, as I do.  What could you have in common with cats and wolves? You thirst to become sacrifices and gifts yourselves; and that is why you thirst to heap up all riches in your soul.  Your soul aspires insatiably after treasures and jewels, because your virtue is insatiable in wanting to give.  You compel all things to come to you and into you, that they may flow back from your fountain as gifts of your love.  Truly, such a bestowing love must become a thief of all values; but I call this selfishness healthy and holy.  There is another selfishness, an all-too-poor, a hungry selfishness that always wants to steal, that selfishness of the sick, the sick selfishness.  It looks with the eye of a thief upon all lustrous things; with the greed of hunger it measures him who has plenty to eat; and it is always skulking about the table of the givers.  Sickness speaks from such craving, and hidden degeneration; the thieving greed of this longing speaks of a sick body.  Tell me, my brothers: what do we account bad and the worst of all? Is it not degeneration? – And we always suspect degeneration where the bestowing soul is lacking.  Our way is upward, from the species across to the super-species.  But the degenerate mind which says ‘All for me’ is a horror to us.  Our mind flies upward: thus it is an image of our bodies, an image of an advance and elevation.  The names of the virtues are such images of advances and elevations.  Thus the body goes through history, evolving and battling.  And the spirit – what is it to the body? The herald, companion, and echo of its battles and victories.  All names of good and evil are images: they do not speak out, they only hint.  He is a fool who seeks knowledge from them.  Whenever your spirit wants to speak in images, pay heed; for that is when your virtue has its origin and beginning.  Then your body is elevated and risen up; it enraptures the spirit with its joy, that it may become creator and evaluator and lover and benefactor of all things.  When your heart surges broad and full like a river, a blessing and a danger to those who live nearby: that is when your virtue has its origin and beginning.  When you are exalted above praise and blame, and your will wants to command all things as the will of a lover: that is when your virtue has its origin and beginning.  When you despise the soft bed and what is pleasant and cannot make your bed too far away from the soft-hearted: that is when your virtue has its origin and beginning.  When you are the willers of a single will, and you call this dispeller of need your essential and necessity: that is when your virtue has its origin and beginning.  Truly, it is a new good and evil! Truly, a new roaring in the depths and the voice of a new fountain! It is power, this new virtue; it is a ruling idea, and around it a subtle soul: a golden sun, and around it the serpent of knowledge.  2 Here Zarathustra fell silent a while and regarded his disciples lovingly.  Then he went on speaking thus, and his voice was different: Stay loyal to the earth, my brothers, with the power of your virtue! May your bestowing love and your knowledge serve towards the meaning of the earth! Thus I beg and entreat you.  Do not let it fly away from the things of earth and beat with its wings against the eternal walls! Alas, there has always been much virtue that has flown away! Lead, as I do, the flown-away virtue back to earth – yes, back to body and life: that it may give the earth its meaning, a human meaning! A hundred times hitherto has spirit as well as virtue flown away and blundered.  Alas, all this illusion and blundering still dwells in our bodies: it has there become body and will.  A hundred times has spirit as well as virtue experimented and gone astray.  Yes, man was an experiment.  Alas, much ignorance and error has become body in us! Not only the reason of millennia – the madness of millennia too breaks out in us.  It is dangerous to be an heir.  We are still fighting step by step with the giant Chance, and hitherto the senseless, the meaningless, has still ruled over mankind.  May your spirit and your virtue serve the meaning of the earth, my brothers: and may the value of all things be fixed anew by you.  To that end you should be fighters! To that end you should be creators! The body purifies itself through knowledge; experimenting with knowledge it elevates itself; to the discerning man all instincts are holy; the soul of the elevated man grows joyful.  Physician, heal yourself: thus you will heal your patient too.  Let his best healing-aid be to see with his own eyes him who makes himself well.  There are a thousand paths that have never yet been trodden, a thousand forms of health and hidden islands of life.  Man and man’s earth are still unexhausted and undiscovered.  Watch and listen, you solitaries! From the future come winds with a stealthy flapping of wings; and good tidings go out to delicate ears.  You solitaries of today, you who have seceded from society, you shall one day be a people: from you, who have chosen out yourselves, shall a chosen people spring – and from this chosen people, the Superman.  Truly, the earth shall yet become a house of healing! And already a new odour floats about it, an odour that brings health – and a new hope! 3 When Zarathustra had said these words he paused like one who has not said his last word; long he balanced the staff doubtfully in his hand.  At last he spoke thus, and his voice was different: I now go away alone, my disciples! You too now go away and be alone! So I will have it.  Truly, I advise you: go away from me and guard yourselves against Zarathustra! And better still: be ashamed of him! Perhaps he has deceived you.  The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends.  One repays a teacher badly if one remains only a pupil.  And why, then, should you not pluck at my laurels? You respect me; but how if one day your respect should tumble? Take care that a falling statue does not strike you dead! You say you believe in Zarathustra? But of what importance is Zarathustra? You are my believers: but of what importance are all believers? You had not yet sought yourselves when you found me.  Thus do all believers; therefore all belief is of so little account.  Now I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when you have all denied me will I return to you.  Truly, with other eyes, my brothers, I shall then seek my lost ones; with another love I shall then love you.  And once more you shall have become my friends and children of one hope: and then I will be with you a thud time, that I may celebrate the great noontide with you.  And this is the great noontide: it is when man stands at the middle of his course between animal and Superman and celebrates his journey to the evening as his highest hope: for it is the journey to a new morning.  Then man, going under, will bless himself; for he will be going over to Superman; and the sun of his knowledge will stand at noontide.  ‘ All gods are dead: now we want the Superman to live ’ – let this be our last will one day at the great noontide! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra PART TWO ‘ – and only when you have all denied me will I return to you .  ‘ Truly, with other eyes, my brothers, I shall then seek my lost ones,’ with another love I shall then love you .  ’ ZARATHUSTRA: ‘ Of the Bestowing Virtue ’ The Child with the Mirror T HEN Zarathustra went back into the mountains and into the solitude of his cave and withdrew from mankind: waiting like a sower who has scattered his seed.  His soul, however, became full of impatience and longing for those whom he loved: for he still had much to give them.  This, indeed, is the most difficult thing: to close the open hand out of love and to preserve one’s modesty as a giver.  Thus months and years passed over the solitary; but his wisdom increased and caused him pain by its abundance.  One morning, however, he awoke before dawn, deliberated long upon his bed, and at length spoke to his heart: Why was I so frightened in my dream that I awoke? Did not a child carrying a mirror come to me? ‘O Zarathustra,’ the child said to me, ‘look at yourself in the mirror!’ But when I looked into the mirror I cried out and my heart was shaken: for I did not see myself, I saw the sneer and grimace of a devil.  Truly, I understand the dream’s omen and warning all too well: my doctrine is in danger, weeds want to be called wheat! My enemies have grown powerful and have distorted the meaning of my doctrine, so that my dearest ones are ashamed of the gifts I gave them.  My friends are lost to me; the hour has come to seek my lost ones! With these words Zarathustra sprang up – not, however, as if gasping for air, but rather like a seer and a singer whom the spirit has moved.  His eagle and his serpent regarded him with amazement: for a dawning happiness lit up his face like the dawn.  What has happened to me, my animals? (said Zarathustra).  Have I not changed? Has bliss not come to me like a storm-wind? My happiness is foolish and it will speak foolish things: it is still too young – so be patient with ill My happiness has wounded me: all sufferers shall be physicians to me! I can go down to my friends again and to my enemies too! Zarathustra can speak and give again, and again show love to those he loves.  My impatient love overflows in torrents down towards morning and evening.  My soul streams into the valleys out of silent mountains and storms of grief.  I have desired and gazed into the distance too long.  I have belonged to solitude too long: thus I have forgotten how to be silent.  I have become nothing but speech and the tumbling of a brook from high rocks: I want to hurl my words down into the valleys.  And let my stream of love plunge into impassable and pathless places! How should a stream not find its way to the sea at last! There is surely a lake in me, a secluded, self-sufficing lake; but my stream of love draws it down with it – to the sea! I go new ways, a new speech has come to me; like all creators, I have grown weary of the old tongues.  My spirit no longer wants to walk on worn-out soles.  All speech runs too slowly for me – I leap into your chariot, storm! And even you! will whip on with my venom! I want to sail across broad seas like a cry and a shout of joy, until I find the Blissful Islands where my friends are waiting – And my enemies with them! How I now love anyone to whom I can simply speak! My enemies too are part of my happiness.  And when I want to mount my wildest horse, it is my spear that best helps me on to it; it is an ever-ready servant to my foot – The spear which I throw at my enemies! How I thank my enemies that at last I can throw it! The tension of my cloud has been too great: between laughter-peals of lightning I want to cast hail showers into the depths.  Mightily then my breast will heave, mightily it will blow its storm away over the mountains: and so it will win relief.  Truly, my happiness and my freedom come like a storm! But my enemies shall think the Evil One is raging over their heads.  Yes, you too, my friends, will be terrified by my wild wisdom; and perhaps you will flee from it together with my enemies.  Ah, if only I knew how to lure you back with shepherds’ flutes! Ah, if only my lioness Wisdom had learned to roar fondly! And we have already learned so much with one another! My wild Wisdom became pregnant upon lonely mountains; upon rough rocks she bore her young, her youngest.  Now she runs madly through the cruel desert and seeks and seeks for the soft grassland – my old, wild Wisdom! Upon the soft grassland of your hearts, my friends! – upon your love she would like to bed her dearest one! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Great Longing O MY soul, I taught you to say ‘today’ as well as ‘once’ and ‘formerly’ and to dance your dance over every Here and There and Over-there.  O my soul, I rescued you from all corners, I brushed dust, spiders, and twilight away from you.  O my soul, I washed the petty shame and corner-virtue away from you and persuaded you to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.  With the storm which is called ‘spirit’ I blew across your surging sea; I blew all clouds away, I killed even that killer-bird 40 called ‘sin’.  O my soul, I gave you the right to say No like the storm and to say Yes as the open sky says Yes: now, silent as light you stand, and you pass through denying storms.  O my soul, I gave you back freedom over created and uncreated things: and who knows as you know the delight of things to come? O my soul, I taught you contempt that comes not as the gnawing of a worm, the great, the loving contempt which loves most where it despises most.  O my soul, I taught you so to persuade that you persuade the elements themselves to come to you: like the sun that persuades the sea to rise even to its height.  O my soul, I took from you all obeying, knee-bending, and obsequiousness; I myself gave you the names ‘Dispeller of Care’ and ‘Destiny’.  O my soul, I gave you new names and many-coloured toys, I called you ‘destiny’ and ‘encompassment of encompassments’ and ‘time’s umbilical cord’ and ‘azure bell’.  O my soul, I gave your soil all wisdom to drink, all new wines and also all immemorially ancient strong wines of wisdom.  O my soul, I poured every sun and every night and every silence and every longing upon you: – then you grew up for me like a vine.  O my soul, now you stand superabundant and heavy, a vine with swelling udders and close-crowded golden-brown wine-grapes: oppressed and weighed down by your happiness, expectant from abundance and yet bashful because of your expectancy.  O my soul, now there is nowhere a soul more loving and encompassing and spacious! Where could future and past be closer together than with you? O my soul, I have given you everything and my hands have become empty through you: and now! now you ask me smiling and full of melancholy: ‘Which of us owes thanks? ‘does the giver not owe thanks to the receiver for receiving? Is giving not a necessity? Is taking not – compassion?’ O my soul, I understand the smile of your melancholy: your superabundance itself now stretches out longing hands! Your fullness looks out over raging seas and searches and waits; the longing of over-fullness gazes out of the smiling heaven of your eyes! And truly, O my soul I Who could behold your smile and not dissolve into tears? The angels themselves dissolve into tears through the over-kindness of your smile.  It is your kindness and over-kindness that wishes not to complain and weep: and yet your smile longs for tears, O my soul, and your trembling mouth for sobs.  ‘Is all weeping not a complaining? And all complaining not an accusing?’ Thus you speak to yourself, and because of that, O my soul, you will rather smile than pour forth your sorrow, pour forth in gushing tears all your sorrow at your fullness and at all the desire of the vine for the vintager and the vine-knife! But if you will not weep nor alleviate in weeping your purple melancholy, you will have to sing , O my soul! Behold, I smile myself, who foretold you this: to sing with an impetuous song, until all seas grow still to listen to your longing, until, over still, longing seas, the boat glides, the golden marvel around whose gold all good, bad, marvellous things leap: and many great and small beasts also, and everything that has light, marvellous feet that can run upon violet paths, towards the golden marvel, the boat of free will, and to its master: he, however, is the vintager who waits with diamond-studded vine-knife, your great redeemer, O my soul, the nameless one for whom only future songs will find a name! And truly, your breath is already fragrant with future songs, already you glow and dream, already you drink thirstily from all deep, resounding wells of comfort, already your melancholy reposes in the bliss of future songs! O my soul, now I have given you everything and even the last thing I had to give, and my hands have become empty through you: – that I bade you sing , behold, that was the last thing I had to give! That I bade you sing, now say, say: Which of us now – owes thanks? But better still: sing for me, sing, O my soul! And let me pay thanks! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra NOTES 1 .  Untergeben has three meanings: to descend or go down; to set (as of the sun); and to be destroyed or to go under.  There is much play upon this triple meaning throughout the book.  The noun Untergang is treated in a similar way.  2 .  Übergang und Untergang .  The antithesis über (over) and unter (under) is very frequently employed.  It is not always possible to bring this out fully in translation.  3 .  Rede = discourse; Vorrede = prologue.  The play on words is lost in translation.  4 .  Breeber = breaker; Verbrecher normally = criminal.  ‘Law-breaker’ retains the verbal repetition.  5 .  Hintenveltler is a coinage meaning ‘those who believe in an after life’.  It gains force from its similarity to the word Hinter-wäldler = backwoodsmen.  6 .  The Danish writer Soren Kierkegaard (1813–55), who advocated a return to Christianity by means of a ‘leap’ from unbelief into belief, is perhaps being criticized here.  Much in this chapter reads like a refutation of Kierkegaard.  7 .  The phrase derives from the expression Mit dem Kopfe durch die Wand wollen = to run full tilt at everything.  8 .  Geist means spirit, mind, and intellect – the human under standing.  I have generally rendered it as spirit because this seems to me to include intellect and mind while intellect is too narrow in meaning and understanding too cumbrous for the contexts in which Geist occurs.  In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Geist never has any supernatural connotation.  Where spirit in the sense of soul (Seele) is intended, I have used the word soul.  9 .  Denken = to think, bedenklich = suspicious – a neat play upon words lost in translation.  10 .  The people referred to are the Persians.  The two following are the Jews and the Germans.  11 .  Nächsten = neighbour and nearest, and throughout this chapter Ferruten (= the most distant), the opposite of nearest, is also made to mean the opposite of neighbour, i.e.  the people of the most distant future.  Hence the continual antithesis between “neighbour’ and ‘most distant’ – an antithesis not quite so clear in translation as in the original.  12 .  An untranslatable pun.  ‘To give a person a paw’ means to strike him across the hand with a cane.  13 .  There is a play upon words here that can hardly be transmitted in translation.  ‘ Nicht nur fort sollst du dich pflanzen, sondern binauf!’ ‘Fortpflanzen ’ means to propagate (biological) and to trans plant (botanical); ‘ binpflanzen ’ means to plant out (in the sense of planting out cuttings from a single, original plant).  The sentence means: You should not only propagate yourself, transplant your self in the future just as you are; you should see to it that your children are something higher and less confined than you.  14 .  The reference is to the first line of the final verse of Goethe’s Faust Part Two: All that is transitory is but an image.  See also note 19.  15 .  In German gerecht (just) and geräcbt (revenged) are pronounced identically.  16 .  Hoch und steil leben means literally to live in a high and steep place, figuratively to live nobly and boldly.  17 .  Blicke = glances; Augenblicke = moments.  But by a quibble ‘Augenblicke ’ can be made to mean ‘glances of the eyes’ (Augen — eyes).  This word-play is lost in translation.  18 .  ‘Doer’ is in German (in this case) Handelnden – giving a play upon the word ‘hand’.  19 .The final ‘Mystic Chorus’ of Goethe’s Faust Part Two is burlesqued in this chapter.  Verbal references to it will be clear from the following literal translation: All that is transitory Is but an image; The unattainable Here becomes reality; The indescribable Here it is done! The eternal-womanly Draws up upward! 20 .  The Wanderer and his Shadow is the title of one of Nietzsche’s books (the Third Part of Human, All Too Human) .  21 .  The prophet is Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860), who also appears in Part Four.  22 .  Gedanken und Hintergedanken : the antithesis is lost in translation.  23 .  Bucklichte = hunchback; bucklicht reden = to speak crossly.  24 .  Grund = ground and reason.  The pun is amplified in ‘foreground’ (superficial reasons) and ‘background’ (fundamental reasons).  25 .  This scene is a memory from Nietzsche’s childhood.  Nietzsche’s father died following a fall, and it seems that Nietzsche was attracted to the scene by the frightened barking of a dog: he found his father lying unconscious.  It is not entirely clear why the scene should have been evoked at this point.  The most likely suggestion is that Nietzsche at one time thought that events recurred within historical time, and was troubled by the idea that he might meet the same death as his father.  (The idea seems to have assumed the nature of an obsession: its origin probably lay in Nietszche’s fear of madness, which was strengthened by the fact that his father died insane.  The insanity was caused by the fall, but Nietzsche was probably doubtful whether the fall did not merely bring to the surface an inherited weakness.) This old idea may have come into the author’s mind at this point, and have been included in the text as a cryptic ‘history’ of the theory of the eternal recurrence.  What follows is, of course, symbolic and not actual.  26 .  For ‘accepted his destiny’ the author here uses the idiom ‘stood upon his destiny’, giving point to the words ‘with firm feet’, which in translation may seem puzzling.  27 .  Himmel means both ‘sky’ and ‘heaven’.  28 .  Von Ohngefähr means ‘by chance’ – but the author treats the noun as a proper name and ennobles it by adding ‘von ’, the ordinary designation of nobility.  29 .  I have left this paragraph as it stands because a properly idiomatic translation would alter the original more than is justified.  Es gibt sich , as well as meaning ‘it is given’, is employed idiomatically to mean ‘it will get better’, or simply as the verbal equivalent of a shrug of the shoulders.  Es nimmt sich – ‘it is taken’ – has no such idiomatic connotation, and is employed by the author simply as an (untranslatable) antithesis to es gibt sich .  30 .  A pun on the two meanings of Geist – spirit and intellect.  31 .  Dämmerten – a scornful reference to Wagner’s Gotter- dämmerung (The Twilight of the Gods).  32 .  The bray of an ass is rendered in German la (pronounced ee-ah), which sounds and looks very much like Ja = yes.  I have adopted Thomas Common’s translation of this as ‘Ye-a’ (the best that can be done, I think).  Thomas Common always translates Ja as ‘yea’, in accordance with the notion that Thus Spoke Zarathustra is mock-Biblical throughout.  The author employs this humorous device to great effect in Part Four.  33 .  The imagery of this section derives from the saying Waster bat keine Balken = Water is not planked over, Praise the sea but keep on dry land.  Im Fluss means ‘in flux’, but also ‘in the river’ and ‘flowing’.  Later in the same section, ‘Have not all railings and gangways fallen into the water and come to nothing’ refers to the expression ins Wasser fallen , which means to melt away, to come to nothing, as well as, literally, to fall into the water.  This method of reducing an abstract idea to a concrete image by means of everyday idioms is of the essence of Nietzsche’s art – and one reason why the vividness of his style is often dimmed in translation.  34 .  A play upon Vorspiel = prologue, and Beispiel = example.  35 .  A play upon Unterbalt = maintenance, and Unterbaltung = entertainment.  36 .  A play upon Eheschliessen = marriage contract, and Ehebrechen = literally marriage breaking, usually adultery.  The literal meaning of Ehebrechen is played upon in the following paragraphs.  37 .  A play upon Versprechen = promise, and Verseben = mistake.  The words balance one another because sprecben by itself means’ to speak’, and seben means’ to see’.  38 .  A play, frequent in Thus Spoke Zarathustra , upon versuchen = to experiment, to attempt, and suchen = to seek.  39 .  A malicious reference to the opening of Act Three of Wagner’s Siegfried , in which the Wanderer (Wotan) calls up Erda, the Earth Mother, from her sleep, and after a fifteen-minute colloquy bids her return to sleep, The style of this whole passage imitates that of the Wanderer’s summons.  40 .  Würgerin is the feminine form of ‘strangler’ or ‘throttler’; but the word also means the ‘shrike’.  It is in the feminine form because die Sünde = sin, is feminine.  41 .  A play upon Geduld = patience, and dulden = to endure, to suffer in patience.  42 .  A play upon two meanings of Probe : ‘proof or test’ and ‘exhibition’.  43 .  Verstuben means both’ to test’ and’ to tempt’.  44 .  Unter vier Augen gesprochen = between ourselves (literally ‘spoken beneath four eyes’).  The last pope, however, is blind in one eye.  45 .  A play upon verfolgen = to persecute, andfolgea = to follow.  46 .  A play upon Suchung = seeking, Heim = home, and Helm- suchung = affliction.  47 .  Reif means both ‘ring’ and ‘ripe’.  48 .  Tagedieb (lazy bones) means literally ‘thief of daytime’.  49 .  A play upon the similar sound of deutscb = German, and deutlich = clearly.  Deutschreden , used idiomatically, means ‘to speak clearly’ (compare ‘in plain English’).  50 .  Abendmahl , the word employed here and in the title of the chapter, is an old form of Abendessen , that is, ‘supper’.  But it is also the normal word for ‘Holy Communion’, which is of course an imitation of Christ’s last meal with his followers, called in English ‘The Last Supper’.  The pun upon ‘supper’ and ‘Holy Communion’ is not translatable, except perhaps in the way I have attempted.  51 .  A play upon Sprünge = leaps, and Seitensprunge = literally ‘side leaps’, idiomatically ‘escapades’.  52 .  Ich kann nicbt anders, Gott belfe atirl — Luther’s famous words before the Diet of Worms.  53 .  Leib-Farbe means literally ‘body colour’, but idiomatically ‘favourite colour’.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Cry of Distress T HE following day Zarathustra was again sitting upon the stone before his cave while the animals were roving about in the world outside fetching fresh food – and fresh honey, too: for Zarathustra had consumed and squandered the old honey to the last drop.  But as he was sitting there with a stick in his hand, tracing the shadow of his figure in the ground, thinking (and truly!) not about himself and his shadow – all at once he started back in alarm: for he saw another shadow beside his own.  And as he quickly rose and looked around, behold, there stood beside him the prophet, the same that had once eaten and drunk at his table, the prophet of the great weariness who taught: ‘It is all one, nothing is worth while, the world is without meaning, knowledge chokes.’ But his face had changed in the interim; and when Zarathustra looked into the prophet’s eyes, his heart was again startled: so many evil prophecies and ashen lightning-flashes passed across this face! The prophet, who had perceived what was going on in Zarathustra’s soul, wiped his hand over his face, as if he wanted to wipe it away; Zarathustra did the same.  And when each had silently composed and reassured himself, they shook hands as a sign that they wanted to recognize one another.  ‘Welcome to you,’ said Zarathustra, ‘you prophet of the great weariness; not in vain shall you once have been guest at my table.  Eat and drink with me today also, and forgive a cheerful old man for sitting down at table with you!’ ‘A cheerful old man?’ answered the prophet, shaking his head.  ‘But whoever you are or want to be, O Zarathustra, you have little time left up here to be it – in a little time your boat shall no longer sit in the dry!’ ‘Am I then sitting in the dry?’ asked Zarathustra, laughing.  ‘The waves around your mountain rise and rise,’ answered the prophet, ‘waves of great distress and affliction: soon they will lift your boat too, and carry you away.’ Thereupon Zarathustra was silent and wondered.  ‘Do you still hear nothing?’ the prophet went on.  ‘Does not the sound of rushing and roaring arise from the depths?’ Zarathustra was again silent and listened: then he heard a long, protracted cry, which the abysses threw from one to another, for none of them wanted to retain it, so evil did it sound.  ‘You preacher of evil,’ said Zarathustra at last, ‘that is a cry of distress and a human cry, perhaps it comes from out a black sea.  But what is human distress to me! The ultimate sin that is reserved for me – perhaps you know what it is called?’ ‘Pity !’ answered the prophet from an overflowing heart, and raised both hands aloft – ‘O Zarathustra, I come to seduce you to your ultimate sin!’ – And hardly were these words spoken than the cry rang out again, and more protracted and more distressful than before, and much nearer.  ‘Do you hear? Do you hear, O Zarathustra?’ cried the prophet.  ‘The cry is meant for you, it calls to you: Come, come, come, it is time, it is high time!’ Hereupon Zarathustra was silent, confused, and deeply shaken; at last he asked like one undecided: ‘And who is it that calls me?’ ‘But you know who it is,’ answered the prophet vehemently, ‘why do you hide yourself? It is the Higher Man that cries for you!’ ‘The Higher Man?’ cried Zarathustra, horror-struck.  ‘What does he want? What does he want? The Higher Man! What does he want here?’ – and his skin was covered with sweat.  The prophet, however, did not respond to Zarathustra’s anguish, but listened intently towards the depths.  But when it had remained quiet there for a long time, he turned his gaze back and saw Zarathustra standing and trembling.  ‘O Zarathustra,’ he began in a scornful voice, ‘you do not stand there like one made giddy by happiness: you will have to dance if you are not to fall over! ‘But even if you were to dance before me and indulge in all your tricks, no one could say: “Behold, here dances the last happy man!” ‘Anyone who sought him here would visit these heights in vain: he would find caves, certainly, and backwood-caves, hiding-places for the hidden, but not mines of happiness and treasure-houses and new gold-veins of happiness.  ‘Happiness – how could man find happiness with such buried men and hermits! Must I yet seek ultimate happiness upon blissful islands and far away among forgotten seas? ‘But it is all one, nothing is worth while, seeking is useless, and there are no blissful islands any more!’ Thus sighed the prophet; with his last sigh, however, Zarathustra again became cheerful and assured, like one emerging from a deep chasm into the light.  ‘No! No! Thrice No!’ he cried vigorously, and stroked his beard.  ‘I know better! There still are blissful islands! Do not talk about such things, you sighing sack-cloth! ‘Cease to splash about such things, you morning rain-cloud! Do I not stand here already wet with your affliction and drenched as a dog? ‘Now I shall shake myself and run away from you, so that I may become dry again: you must not be surprised at that! Do you think me discourteous? But this is my court.  ‘But concerning your Higher Man: very well! I shall seek him at once in those forests: his cry came from there .  Perhaps he is being attacked by an evil beast.  ‘He is in my domain: here he shall not come to harm! And truly, there are many evil beasts about me.’ With these words Zarathustra turned to go.  Then the prophet said: ‘O Zarathustra, you are a rogue! ‘I know it: you want to be rid of me! You would rather run into the forests and waylay evil beasts! ‘But what good will it do you? In the evening you will have me back; I shall sit in your own cave, patient and heavy as a log – and wait for you!’ ‘So be it!’ Zarathustra shouted behind him as he departed: ‘and whatever in my cave belongs to me also belongs to you, my guest! ‘But should you discover honey in there, very well! just lick it up, you growling bear, and sweeten your soul! For in the evening we must both be in good spirits, ‘in good spirits and glad that this day has ended! And you yourself shall dance to my songs as my dancing bear.  ‘You do not believe it? You are shaking your head? Very well! Go on, old bear! But I too – am a prophet!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Adder’s Bite O NE day Zarathustra had fallen asleep under a fig tree because of the heat, and had laid his arms over his face.  An adder came along and bit him in the neck, so that Zarathustra cried out with pain.  When he had taken his arm from his face he regarded the snake: it recognized Zarathustra’s eyes, turned away awkwardly and was about to go.  ‘No, don’t go,’ said Zarathustra; ‘you have not yet received my thanks! You have awakened me at the right time, I still have a long way to go.’ ‘You have only a short way to go,’ said the adder sadly, ‘my poison is deadly.’ Zarathustra smiled.  ‘When did a dragon ever die from the poison of a snake?’ he said.  ‘But take your poison back! You are not rich enough to give it me!’ Then the adder fell upon his neck again and licked his wound.  When Zarathustra once told this to his disciples, they asked: ‘And what, O Zarathustra, is the moral of your story?’ Zarathustra answered the question thus: The good and just call me the destroyer of morals: my story is immoral.  When, however, you have an enemy, do not requite him good for evil: for that would make him ashamed.  But prove that he has done something good to you.  Better to be angry than make ashamed! And when you are cursed, I do not like it that you then want to bless.  Rather curse back a little! And should a great injustice be done you, then quickly do five little injustices besides.  He who bears injustice alone is terrible to behold.  Did you know this already? Shared injustice is half justice.  And he who can bear it should take the injustice upon himself.  A little revenge is more human than no revenge at all.  And if the punishment be not also a right and an honour for the transgressor, then I do not like your punishment.  It is more noble to declare yourself wrong than to maintain you are right, especially when you are right.  Only you must be rich enough for it.  I do not like your cold justice; and from the eye of your judges there always gazes only the executioner and his cold steel.  Tell me, where is the justice which is love with seeing eyes to be found? Then devise the love that bears not only all punishment but also all guilt! Then devise the justice that acquits everyone except the judges! Will you learn this, too? To him who wants to be just from the very heart even a lie becomes philanthropy.  But how could I be just from the very heart? How can I give everyone what is his? Let this suffice me: I give everyone what is mine.  Finally, my brothers, guard yourselves against doing wrong to any hermit! How could a hermit forget? How could he requite? A hermit is like a deep well.  It is easy to throw a stone into it; but if it sink to the bottom, tell me, who shall fetch it out again? Guard yourselves against offending the hermit! But if you have done so, well then, kill him as well! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Redemption As Zarathustra was going across the great bridge one day, the cripples and beggars surrounded him and a hunchback spoke to him thus: Behold, Zarathustra! The people, too, learn from you and acquire belief in your teaching: but for the people to believe you completely, one thing is still needed – you must first convince even us cripples! Here now you have a fine selection and truly, an opportunity with more than one forelock! You can cure the blind and make the lame walk; and from him who has too much behind him you could well take a little away, too – that, I think, would be the right way to make the cripples believe in Zarathustra! But Zarathustra replied thus to him who had spoken: If one takes the hump away from the hunchback, one takes away his spirit – that is what the people teach.  And if one gives eyes to the blind man, he sees too many bad things on earth: so that he curses him who cured him.  But he who makes the lame man walk does him the greatest harm: for no sooner can he walk than his vices run away with him – that is what the people teach about cripples.  And why should Zarathustra not learn from the people, if the people learn from Zarathustra? But it is the least serious thing to me, since I have been among men, to see that this one lacks an eye and that one an ear and a third lacks a leg, and there are others who have lost their tongue or their nose or their head.  I see and have seen worse things and many of them so monstrous that I should not wish to speak of all of them; but of some of them I should not wish to be silent: and they are, men who lack everything except one thing, of which they have too much – men who are no more than a great eye or a great mouth or a great belly or something else great – I call such men inverse cripples.  And when I emerged from my solitude and crossed over this bridge for the first time, I did not believe my eyes and looked and looked again and said at last: ‘That is an ear! An ear as big as a man!’ I looked yet more closely: and in fact under the ear there moved something that was pitifully small and meagre and slender.  And in truth, the monstrous ear sat upon a little, thin stalk – the stalk, however, was a man! By the use of a magnifying glass one could even discern a little, envious face as well; and one could discern, too, that a turgid little soul was dangling from the stalk.  The people told me, however, that the great ear was not merely a man, but a great man, a genius.  But I have never believed the people when they talked about great men – and I held to my belief that it was an inverse cripple, who had too little of everything and too much of one thing.  When Zarathustra had spoken thus to the hunchback and to those whose mouthpiece and advocate he was, he turned to his disciples with profound ill-humour and said: Truly, my friends, I walk among men as among the fragments and limbs of men! The terrible thing to my eye is to find men shattered in pieces and scattered as if over a battle-field of slaughter.  And when my eye flees from the present to the past, it always discovers the same thing: fragments and limbs and dreadful chances – but no men! The present and the past upon the earth – alas! my friends – that is my most intolerable burden; and I should not know how to live, if I were not a seer of that which must come.  A seer, a wilier, a creator, a future itself and a bridge to the future – and alas, also like a cripple upon this bridge: Zarathustra is all this.  And even you have often asked yourselves: Who is Zarathustra to us? What shall we call him? and, like me, you answer your own questions with questions.  Is he a promiser? Or a fulfiller? A conqueror? Or an inheritor? A harvest? Or a ploughshare? A physician? Or a convalescent? Is he a poet? Or a genuine man? A liberator? Or a subduer? A good man? Or an evil man? I walk among men as among fragments of the future: of that future which I scan.  And it is all my art and aim, to compose into one and bring together what is fragment and riddle and dreadful chance.  And how could I endure to be a man, if man were not also poet and reader of riddles and the redeemer of chance! To redeem the past and to transform every ‘It was’ into an ‘I wanted it thus!’ – that alone do I call redemption! Will – that is what the liberator and bringer of joy is called: thus I have taught you, my friends! But now learn this as well: The will itself is still a prisoner.  Willing liberates: but what is it that fastens in fetters even the liberator? ‘It was’: that is what the will’s teeth-gnashing and most lonely affliction is called.  Powerless against that which has been done, the will is an angry spectator of all things past.  The will cannot will backwards; that it cannot break time and time’s desire – that is the will’s most lonely affliction.  Willing liberates: what does willing itself devise to free itself from its affliction and to mock at its dungeon? Alas, every prisoner becomes a fool! The imprisoned will, too, releases itself in a foolish way.  It is sullenly wrathful that time does not run back; ‘That which was’ – that is what the stone which it cannot roll away is called.  And so, out of wrath and ill-temper, the will rolls stones about and takes revenge upon him who does not, like it, feel wrath and ill-temper.  Thus the will, the liberator, becomes a malefactor: and upon all that can suffer it takes revenge for its inability to go backwards.  This, yes, this alone is revenge itself: the will’s antipathy towards time and time’s ‘It was’.  Truly, a great foolishness dwells in our will; and that this foolishness acquired spirit has become a curse to all human kind.  The spirit of revenge : my friends, that, up to now, has been mankind’s chief concern; and where there was suffering, there was always supposed to be punishment.  ‘Punishment’ is what revenge calls itself: it feigns a good conscience for itself with a lie.  And because there is suffering in the wilier himself, since he cannot will backwards – therefore willing itself and all life was supposed to be – punishment! And then cloud upon cloud rolled over the spirit: until at last madness preached: ‘Everything passes away, therefore everything deserves to pass away! ‘And that law of time, that time must devour her children, is justice itself: thus madness preached.  ‘Things are ordered morally according to justice and punishment.  Oh, where is redemption from the stream of things and from the punishment “existence”?’ Thus madness preached.  ‘Can there be redemption when there is eternal justice? Alas, the stone “It was” cannot be rolled away: all punishments, too, must be eternal!’ Thus madness preached.  ‘No deed can be annihilated: how could a deed be undone through punishment? That existence too must be an eternally-recurring deed and guilt, this, this is what is eternal in the punishment “existence”! ‘Except the will at last redeem itself and willing become not-willing –’: but you, my brothers, know this fable-song of madness! I led you away from these fable-songs when I taught you: ‘The will is a creator.’ All ‘It was’ is a fragment, a riddle, a dreadful chance – until the creative will says to it: ‘But I willed it thus!’ Until the creative will says to it: ‘But I will it thus! Thus shall I will it!’ But has it ever spoken thus? And when will this take place? Has the will yet been unharnessed from its own folly? Has the will become its own redeemer and bringer of joy? Has it unlearned the spirit of revenge and all teeth-gnashing? And who has taught it to be reconciled with time, and higher things than reconciliation? The will that is the will to power must will something higher than any reconciliation – but how shall that happen? Who has taught it to will backwards, too? But at this point of his discourse, Zarathustra suddenly broke off and looked exactly like a man seized by extremest terror.  With terrified eyes he gazed upon his disciples; his eyes transpierced their thoughts and their reservations 22 as if with arrows.  But after a short time he laughed again and said in a soothed voice: ‘It is difficult to live among men because keeping silent is so difficult.  Especially for a babbler.’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  The hunchback, however, had listened to the conversation and had covered his face the while; but when he heard Zarathustra laugh, he looked up in curiosity, and said slowly: ‘But why does Zarathustra speak to us differently than to his disciples?’ Zarathustra answered: ‘What is surprising in that? One may well speak in a hunchbacked manner to a hunchback!’ 23 ‘Very good,’ said the hunchback; ‘and with pupils one may well tell tales out of school.  ‘But why does Zarathustra speak to his pupils differently – than to himself?’ Thus Spoke Zarathustra FURTHER READING David B.  Allison, Reading the New Nietzsche (2001) MaudeMarie Clark, Nietzsche on Truth and Morality (1990) R.  J.  Hollingdale, Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy (196 5; 1999) Brian Leiter, Nietzsche on Morality (2002) Bernd Magnus and Kathleen Higgins (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche (1996) Alexander Nehemas, Nietzsche: Life as Literature (1985) F.  Nietzsche, Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality, trans.  R.  J.  Hollingdale, introduction by M.  Tanner (1982) ——— , Dithyrambs of Dionysus, trans, with introduction and notes R.  J.  Hollingdale (1984; 2001) ——— , Untimely Meditations, trans.  R.  J.  Hollingdale, introduction by J.  P.  Stern (1983) John Richardson and Brian Leiter (eds.), Nietzsche (2001) Rudiger Safranski, Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography, trans.  Shelley Frisch (2002) Henry Staten, Nietzsche’s Voice (1990) Tracy Strong, Friedrich Nietzsche and the Politics of Transfiguration (1988) Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Afterworldsmen O NCE Zarathustra too cast his deluded fancy beyond mankind, like all afterworldsmen.  5 Then the world seemed to me die work of a suffering and tormented God.  Then the world seemed to me the dream and fiction of a God; coloured vapour before the eyes of a discontented God.  Good and evil and joy and sorrow and I and You – I thought them coloured vapour before the creator’s eyes.  The creator wanted to look away from himself, so he created the world.  It is intoxicating joy for the sufferer to look away from his suffering and to forget himself.  Intoxicating joy and self-forgetting – that is what I once thought the world.  This world, the eternally imperfect, the eternal and imperfect image of a contradiction – an intoxicating joy to its imperfect creator – that is what I once thought the world.  Thus I too once cast my deluded fancy beyond mankind, like all afterworldsmen.  Beyond mankind in reality? Ah, brothers, this God which I created was human work and human madness, like all gods! He was human, and only a poor piece of man and Ego: this phantom came to me from my own fire and ashes, that is the truth! It did not come to me from the ‘beyond’! What happened, my brothers? I, the sufferer, overcame myself, I carried my own ashes to the mountains, I made for myself a brighter flame.  And behold! the phantom fled from me! Now to me, the convalescent, it would be suffering and torment to believe in such phantoms: it would be suffering to me now and humiliation.  Thus I speak to the afterworldsmen.  It was suffering and impotence – that created all afterworlds; and that brief madness of happiness that only the greatest sufferer experiences.  Weariness, which wants to reach the ultimate with a single leap, with a death-leap, 6 a poor ignorant weariness, which no longer wants even to want: that created all gods and afterworlds.  Believe me, my brothers! It was the body that despaired of the body – that touched the ultimate walls with the fingers of its deluded spirit.  Believe me, my brothers! It was the body that despaired of the earth – that heard the belly of being speak to it.  And then it wanted to get its head through the ultimate walls – and not its head only 7 – over into the ‘other world’.  But that ‘other world’, that inhuman, dehumanized world which is a heavenly Nothing, is well hidden from men; and the belly of being does not speak to man, except as man.  Truly, all being is hard to demonstrate; it is hard to make it speak.  Yet, tell me, brothers, is not the most wonderful of all things most clearly demonstrated? Yes, this Ego, with its contradiction and confusion, speaks most honestly of its being – this creating, willing, evaluating Ego, which is the measure and value of things.  And this most honest being, the Ego – it speaks of the body, and it insists upon the body, even when it fables and fabricates and flutters with broken wings.  Ever more honestly it learns to speak, the Ego: and the more it learns, the more it finds titles and honours for the body and the earth.  My Ego taught me a new pride, I teach it to men: No longer to bury the head in the sand of heavenly things, but to carry it freely, an earthly head which creates meaning for the earth.  I teach mankind a new will: to desire this path that men have followed blindly, and to call it good and no more to creep aside from it, like the sick and dying! It was the sick and dying who despised the body and the earth and invented the things of heaven and the redeeming drops of blood: but even these sweet and dismal poisons they took from the body and the earth! They wanted to escape from their misery and the stars were too far for them.  Then they sighed: ‘Oh if only there were heavenly paths by which to creep into another existence and into happiness!’ – then they contrived for themselves their secret ways and their draughts of blood! Now they thought themselves transported from their bodies and from this earth, these ingrates.  Yet to what do they owe the convulsion and joy of their transport? To their bodies and to this earth.  Zarathustra is gentle with the sick.  Truly, he is not angry at their manner of consolation and ingratitude.  May they become convalescents and overcomers and make for themselves a higher body! Neither is Zarathustra angry with the convalescent if he glances tenderly at his illusions and creeps at midnight around the grave of his God: but even his tears still speak to me of sickness and a sick body.  There have always been many sickly people among those who invent fables and long for God: they have a raging hate for the enlightened man and for that youngest of virtues which is called honesty.  They are always looking back to dark ages: then, indeed, illusion and faith were a different question; raving of the reason was likeness to God, and doubt was sin.  I know these Godlike people all too well: they want to be believed in, and doubt to be sin.  I also know all too well what it is they themselves most firmly believe in.  Truly not in afterworlds and redeeming drops of blood: they believe most firmly in the body, and their own body is for them their thing-in-itself.  But it is a sickly thing to them: and they would dearly like to get out of their skins.  That is why they hearken to preachers of death and themselves preach afterworlds.  Listen rather, my brothers, to the voice of the healthy body: this is a purer voice and a more honest one.  Purer and more honest of speech is the healthy body, perfect and square-built: and it speaks of the meaning of the earth.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Scholars A S I lay asleep, a sheep ate at the ivy-wreath upon my head – ate and said: ‘Zarathustra is no longer a scholar.’ It spoke and went away stiffly and proud.  A child told me of it.  I like to lie here where children play, beside the broken wall, among thistles and red poppies.  To children I am still a scholar, and to thistles and red poppies, too.  They are innocent, even in their wickedness.  But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar: thus my fate will have it – blessed be my fate! For this is the truth: I have left the house of scholars and slammed the door behind me.  Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table; I have not been schooled, as they have, to crack knowledge as one cracks nuts.  I love freedom and the air over fresh soil; I would sleep on ox-skins rather than on their dignities and respectabilities.  I am too hot and scorched by my own thought: it is often about to take my breath away.  Then I have to get into the open air and away from all dusty rooms.  But they sit cool in the cool shade: they want to be mere spectators in everything and they take care not to sit where the sun burns upon the steps.  Like those who stand in the street and stare at the people passing by, so they too wait and stare at thoughts that others have thought.  If one takes hold of them, they involuntarily raise a dust like sacks of flour; but who could guess that their dust derived from corn and from the golden joy of summer fields? When they give themselves out as wise, their little sayings and truths make me shiver: their wisdom often smells as if it came from the swamp: and indeed, I have heard the frog croak in it! They are clever, they have cunning fingers: what is my simplicity compared with their diversity? Their fingers understand all threading and knitting and weaving: thus they weave the stockings of the spirit! They are excellent clocks: only be careful to wind them up properly! Then they tell the hour without error and make a modest noise in doing so.  They work like mills and rammers: just throw seed-corn into them! – they know how to grind corn small and make white dust of it.  They keep a sharp eye upon one another and do not trust one another as well as they might.  Inventive in small slynesses, they lie in wait for those whose wills go upon lame feet – they lie in wait like spiders.  I have seen how carefully they prepare their poisons; they always put on protective gloves.  They also know how to play with loaded dice; and I found them playing so zealously that they were sweating.  We are strangers to one another, and their virtues are even more opposed to my taste than are their falsehoods and loaded dice.  And when I lived among them I lived above them.  They grew angry with me for that.  They did not want to know that someone was walking over their heads; and so they put wood and dirt and rubbish between their heads and me.  Thus they muffled the sound of my steps: and from then on the most scholarly heard me the worst.  They put all the faults and weaknesses of mankind between themselves and me – they call this a ‘false flooring’ in their houses.  But I walk above their heads with my thoughts in spite of that; and even if I should walk upon my own faults, I should still be above them and their heads.  For men ate not equal: thus speaks justice.  And what I desire they may not desire! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Awakening 1 A FTER the song of the wanderer and shadow, the cave suddenly became full of noise and laughter: and as the assembled guests were all speaking together and even the ass no longer remained silent in the face of such encouragement, Zarathustra was overcome by a little repugnance and scorn towards his visitors: although, at the same time, he rejoiced at their gaiety.  For it seemed to him to be a sign of recovery.  So he stole out into the open air and spoke with his animals.  ‘Where is their distress now?’ he said, and already he was breathing again after his little disgust, ‘it seems that in my home they have unlearned distressful crying! ‘although, unhappily, not yet crying itself.’ And Zarathustra stopped his ears, for just then the ‘Ye-a’ of the ass mingled strangely with the loud rejoicing of these Higher Men.  ‘They are merry,’ he began again,’ and, who knows, perhaps at the expense of their host.  And if they have learned laughing from me, still it is not my laughter they have learned.  ‘But what of it! They are old men: they recover in their own way, they laugh in their own way; my ears have suffered worse things and not been annoyed.  ‘This day is a victory: it wavers already, it flees, the Spirit of Gravity , my old arch-enemy I How well this day is ending, that began so ill and so gravely! ‘And it is ending.  Evening has already come: it is riding over the sea to us; that excellent horseman! How it sways, joyfully returning, in its purple saddle! ‘The sky gazes, clear, upon it, the world lies deep: O all you strange men who have come to me, it is already worth while to live with me! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  And then the shouting and laughter of the Higher Men again came from the cave: it had started again.  ‘They are biting, my bait is effective, before them too their enemy, the Spirit of Gravity, is wavering.  Already they are learning to laugh at themselves: do I hear aright? ‘My man’s fare, my succulent and strengthening discourse, is effective: and truly, I did not feed them with distending vegetables! But with warriors’ food, with conquerors’ food: I awakened new desires.  ‘There are new hopes in their arms and legs, their hearts are stretching themselves.  They are discovering new words, soon their spirits will breathe wantonness.  ‘To be sure, such food may not be for children, or for fond little women, old or young.  Their stomachs are persuaded otherwise; I am not their teacher and physician.  ‘These Higher Men’s disgust is wavering: very well! that is my victory.  They are growing assured in my kingdom, all stupid shame is leaving them, they are unburdening themselves.  ‘They are unburdening their hearts, good hours are coming back to them, they take their ease and ruminate – they grow thankful .  ‘This I take for the best sign: they grow thankful.  Before long they will be devising festivals and erecting memorials to their old joys.  ‘They are convalescents !’ Thus spoke Zarathustra gaily to his heart and gazed out; his animals, however, pressed around him and respected his happiness and his silence.  2 But suddenly Zarathustra’s ear was startled: for the cave, which had been full of noise and laughter, all at once became deathly still; his nose, however, smelt a sweet-smelling vapour and incense, as if of burning pine-cones.  ‘What is happening? What are they doing?’ he asked himself, and stole to the entrance, so that he might behold his guests unobserved.  But, wonder upon wonders! what did he then see with his own eyes! ‘They have all become pious again, they are praying , they are mad!’ he said, and was astounded beyond measure.  And indeed, all these Higher Men, the two kings, the retired pope, the evil sorcerer, the voluntary beggar, the wanderer and shadow, the old prophet, the conscientious man of the spirit, and the ugliest man: they were all kneeling like children and credulous old women, and worshipping the ass.  And at that very moment the ugliest man began to gurgle and snort, as if something unutterable was trying to get out of him; but when he actually reached the point of speech, behold, it was a strange, pious litany in praise of the worshipped and perfumed ass.  The litany went thus: Amen! And praise and honour and wisdom and thanks and glory and strength be to our God for ever and ever! The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  He bears our burden, he has taken upon himself the likeness of a slave, he is patient from the heart and he never says Nay; and he who loves his God, chastises him.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  He does not speak, except always to say Yea to the world he created: thus he praises his world.  It is his subtlety that does not speak: thus he is seldom thought wrong.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  He goes through the world unpretentiously.  Grey is the favourite colour 53 in which he wraps his virtue.  If he has spirit, he conceals it; but everyone believes in his long ears.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  What hidden wisdom it is, that he wears long ears and says only Yea and never Nay! Has he not created the world after his own image, that is, as stupid as possible? The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  You go straight and crooked ways; you care little what we men think straight or crooked.  Your kingdom is beyond good and evil.  It is your innocence not to know what innocence is.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  For behold, how you spurn no one, not beggars nor kings.  You suffer little children to come to you, and when bad boys bait you, you simply say Yea.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  You love she-asses and fresh figs, you eat anything.  A thistle titillates your heart, if you happen to be hungry.  The wisdom of a god is in that.  The ass, however, brayed ‘Ye-a’.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Flies of the Market-place F LEE, my friend, into your solitude! I see you deafened by the uproar of the great men and pricked by the stings of the small ones.  Forest and rock know well how to be silent with you.  Be like the tree again, the wide-branching tree that you love: calmly and attentively it leans out over the sea.  Where solitude ceases, there the market-place begins; and where the market-place begins, there begins the uproar of the great actors and the buzzing of the poisonous flies.  In the world even the best things are worthless apart from him who first presents them: people call these presenters ‘great men’.  The people have little idea of greatness, that is to say: creativeness.  But they have a taste for all presenters and actors of great things.  The world revolves about the inventor of new values: imperceptibly it revolves.  But the people and the glory revolve around the actor: that is ‘the way of the world’.  The actor possesses spirit but little conscience of the spirit.  8 He always believes in that with which he most powerfully produces belief – produces belief in himself ! Tomorrow he will have a new faith and the day after tomorrow a newer one.  He has a quick perception, as the people have, and a capricious temperament.  To overthrow – to him that means: to prove.  To drive frantic – to him that means: to convince.  And blood is to him the best of all arguments.  A truth that penetrates only sensitive ears he calls a lie and a thing of nothing.  Truly, he believes only in gods who make a great noise in the world! The market-place is full of solemn buffoons – and the people boast of their great men! These are their heroes of the hour.  But the hour presses them: so they press you.  And from you too they require a Yes or a No.  And woe to you if you want to set your chair between For and Against.  Do not be jealous, lover of truth, because of these inflexible and oppressive men! Truth has never yet clung to the arm of an inflexible man.  Return to your security because of these abrupt men: only in the market-place is one assailed with Yes? or No? The experience of all deep wells is slow: they must wait long until they know what has fallen into their depths.  All great things occur away from glory and the marketplace: the inventors of new values have always lived away from glory and the market-place.  Flee, my friend, into your solitude: I see you stung by poisonous flies.  Flee to where the raw, rough breeze blows! Flee into your solitude! You have lived too near the small and the pitiable men.  Flee from their hidden vengeance! Towards you they are nothing but vengeance.  No longer lift your arm against them! They are innumerable and it is not your fate to be a fly-swat.  Innumerable are these small and pitiable men; and raindrops and weeds have already brought about the destruction of many a proud building.  You are no stone, but already these many drops have made you hollow.  You will yet break and burst apart through these many drops.  I see you wearied by poisonous flies, I see you bloodily torn in a hundred places; and your pride refuses even to be angry.  They want blood from you in all innocence, their bloodless souls thirst for blood – and therefore they sting in all innocence.  But you, profound man, you suffer too profoundly even from small wounds; and before you have recovered, the same poison-worm is again crawling over your hand.  You are too proud to kill these sweet-toothed creatures.  But take care that it does not become your fate to bear all their poisonous injustice! They buzz around you even with their praise: and their praise is importunity.  They want to be near your skin and your blood.  They flatter you as if you were a god or a devil; they whine before you as before a god or a devil.  What of it! They are flatterers and whiners, and nothing more.  And they are often kind to you.  But that has always been the prudence of the cowardly.  Yes, the cowardly are prudent! They think about you a great deal with their narrow souls -you are always suspicious to them.  Everything that is thought about a great deal is finally thought suspicious.  9 They punish you for all your virtues.  Fundamentally they forgive you only – your mistakes.  Because you are gentle and just-minded, you say: ‘They are not to be blamed for their little existence.’ But their little souls think: ‘All great existence is blameworthy.’ Even when you are gentle towards them, they still feel you despise them; and they return your kindness with secret unkindness.  Your silent pride always offends their taste; they rejoice if you are ever modest enough to be vain.  When we recognize a peculiarity in a man we also inflame that peculiarity.  So guard yourself against the small men! Before you, they feel themselves small, and their baseness glimmers and glows against you in hidden vengeance.  Have you not noticed how often they became silent when you approached them, and how their strength left them like smoke from a dying fire? Yes, my friend, you are a bad conscience to your neighbours: for they are unworthy of you.  Thus they hate you and would dearly like to suck your blood.  Your neighbours will always be poisonous flies: that about you which is great, that itself must make them more poisonous and ever more fly-like.  Flee, my friend, into your solitude and to where the raw, rough breeze blows! It is not your fate to be a fly-swat.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Shadow B UT hardly had the voluntary beggar run off and was Zarathustra alone again than he heard a new voice behind him calling: ‘Stop! Zarathustra! Wait! It is I, O Zarathustra, I, your shadow!’ But Zarathustra did not wait, for a sudden ill-humour overcame him on account of all the crowding and thronging on his mountains.  ‘Where has my solitude fled?’ he said.  ‘Truly, it is becoming too much for me; these mountains are swarming, my kingdom is no longer of this world, I need new mountains.  ‘Does my shadow call me? Of what account is my shadow I Let it run after me! I – shall run away from it.’ Thus spoke Zarathustra to his heart and ran off.  But he who was behind him followed after: so that forthwith there were three runners one behind the other, that is, foremost the voluntary beggar, then Zarathustra, and thirdly and hindmost his shadow.  They had not been running thus for long when Zarathustra became conscious of his folly and at once shook off his ill-humour and disgust.  ‘What!’ he said, ‘have not the most laughable things always happened with us old hermits and saints? ‘Truly, my folly has grown high in the mountains! Now I hear six foolish old legs clattering one behind the other! ‘But can Zarathustra really be afraid of a shadow? And anyway, I think it has longer legs than I.’ Thus spoke Zarathustra, laughing with his eyes and his entrails, then stopped and turned quickly around – and behold, in doing so he almost threw his follower and shadow to the ground, the latter followed so closely upon his heels and was so weak.  For when Zarathustra inspected him with his eyes, he was as terrified as if he had suddenly seen a ghost, so slight, dark, hollow, and spent did this follower appear.  ‘Who are you?’ Zarathustra asked furiously, ‘what are you doing here? And why do you call yourself my shadow? I do not like you.’ ‘Forgive me,’ answered the shadow, ‘that it is I; and if you do not like me, very good, O Zarathustra! I praise you and your good taste in that.  ‘I am a wanderer, who has already walked far at your heels: always going but without a goal and without a home: so that, truly, I am almost the eternal Wandering Jew, except that I am neither eternal nor a Jew.  ‘What? Must I always be going? Whirled by every wind, restless, driven onward? O Earth, you have grown too round for me! ‘I have sat on every surface, like weary dust I have fallen asleep upon mirrors and window-panes: everything takes from me, nothing gives, I have become thin – I am almost like a shadow.  ‘But I have fled to you and followed you longest, O Zarathustra, and although I have hidden myself from you, yet I was your best shadow: where you have sat there I sat too.  ‘1 have travelled with you in the remotest, coldest worlds, like a ghost that voluntarily walks over snow and winter roofs.  ‘I have striven with you into all that was forbidden, worst, most remote: and if anything in me be a virtue, it is that I have feared no prohibition.  ‘I have broken up with you whatever my heart revered.  I have overthrown boundary stones and statues, I have pursued the most dangerous desires – truly, I once went beyond every crime.  ‘I have unlearned with you belief in words and values and great names.  When the Devil casts his skin does his name not also fall away? For that too is a skin.  The Devil himself is perhaps – a skin.  ‘“Nothing is true, everything is permitted”: thus I told myself.  I plunged into the coldest water, with head and heart.  Alas, how often I stood naked, like a red crab, on that account! ‘Alas, where have all my goodness and shame and belief in the good fled! Alas, where is that mendacious innocence that I once possessed, the innocence of the good and their noble lies! ‘Truly, too often did I follow close by the feet of truth: then it kicked me in the face.  Sometimes I intended to lie, and behold! only then did I hit – the truth.  ‘Too much has become clear to me: now I am no longer concerned with it.  No longer is there anything living that I love – how should I still love myself? ‘“To live as I desire to live or not to live at all”: that is what I want, that is what the most saintly man wants.  But alas! how can I still have – a desire? ‘Have I – still a goal? A haven to which my sail races? ‘A good wind? Alas, only he who knows where he is going knows which wind is a good and fair wind for him.  ‘What is left to me? A heart weary and insolent; a restless will; infirm wings; a broken backbone.  ‘This seeking for my home: O Zarathustra, do you know this seeking was my affliction, 46 it is consuming me.  ‘Where is – my home? I ask and seek and have sought for it, I have not found it.  Oh eternal Everywhere, oh eternal Nowhere, oh eternal – Vanity!’ Thus spoke the shadow, and Zarathustra’s face lengthened at his words.  ‘You are my shadow!’ he said at length, sorrowfully.  ‘Your danger is no small one, you free spirit and wanderer! You have had a bad day: see you do not have a worse evening! ‘Even a prison at last seems bliss to such restless people as you.  Have you ever seen how captured criminals sleep? They sleep peacefully, they enjoy their new security.  ‘Take care that you are not at last captured by a narrow belief, a hard, stern illusion! For henceforth everything that is narrow and firm will entice and tempt you.  ‘You have lost your goal: alas, how will you get over and laugh away that loss? By losing your goal – you have lost your way, too! ‘You poor traveller, wanderer, you weary butterfly! Would you this evening have a resting place and homestead? So go up to my cave! ‘Yonder leads the way to my cave.  And now I will run quickly away from you again.  Already it is as if a shadow were lying upon me.  ‘I will run alone, so that it may again grow bright around me.  For that I still have to be a long time merrily on my legs.  In the evening, however, we shall – dance!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Home-Coming O SOLITUDE ! Solitude, my home ! I have lived too long wildly in wild strange lands to come home to you without tears! Now shake your finger at me as mothers do, now smile at me as mothers smile, now say merely: ‘And who was it that once stormed away from me like a storm-wind? – ‘who departing cried: I have sat too long with Solitude, I have unlearned how to be silent! You have surely learned that – now? ‘O Zarathustra, I know all: and that you were lonelier among the crowd, you solitary, than you ever were with me! ‘Loneliness is one thing, solitude another: you have learned that – now! And that among men you will always be wild and strange: ‘wild and strange even when they love you: for above all they want to be indulged ! ‘But here you are at your own hearth and home; here you can utter everything and pour out every reason, nothing is here ashamed of hidden, hardened feelings.  ‘Here all things come caressingly to your discourse and flatter you: for they want to ride upon your back.  Upon every image you here ride to every truth.  ‘Here you may speak to all things straight and true: and truly, it sounds as praise to their ears, that someone should speak with all things – honestly! ‘But it is another thing to be lonely.  For, do you remember, O Zarathustra? When once your bird cried above you as you stood in the forest undecided, ignorant where to go, beside a corpse.  ‘When you said: May my animals lead me! I found it more dangerous among men than among animals.  That was loneliness! ‘And do you remember, O Zarathustra? When you sat upon your island, a well of wine among empty buckets, giving and distributing, bestowing and out-pouring among the thirsty: ‘until at last you sat alone thirsty among the intoxicated and lamented each night: “Is it not more blessed to receive than to give? And more blessed to steal than to receive?” – That was loneliness! ‘And do you remember, O Zarathustra? When your stillest hour came and tore you forth from yourself, when it said in an evil whisper: “Speak and break!” – ‘when it made you repent of all your waiting and silence and discouraged your humble courage: That was loneliness!’ O Solitude! Solitude, my home I How blissfully and tenderly does your voice speak to me! We do not question one another, we do not complain to one another, we go openly together through open doors.  For with you all is open and clear; and here even the hours run on lighter feet.  For time weighs down more heavily in the dark than in the light.  Here, the words and word-chests of all existence spring open to me: all existence here wants to become words, all becoming here wants to learn speech from me.  Down there, however – all speech is in vain! There, the best wisdom is to forget and pass by: I have learned that – now! He who wants to understand all things among men has to touch all things.  But my hands are too clean for that.  I even dislike to breathe in their breath; alas, that I lived so long among their noise and bad breath! O blissful stillness around me! O pure odours around me! Oh, how this stillness draws pure breath from a deep breast! Oh, how it listens, this blissful stillness! But down there – everything speaks, everything is unheard.  One may ring in one’s wisdom with bells – the shopkeeper in the market-place will out-ring it with pennies! Everything among them speaks, no one knows any longer how to understand.  Everything falls away into failure, nothing falls any longer into deep wells.  Everything among them speaks, nothing prospers and comes to an end any longer.  Everything cackles, but who still wants to sit quietly upon the nest and hatch eggs? Everything among them speaks, everything is talked down.  And what yesterday was still too hard for time itself and its teeth, today hangs chewed and picked from the mouth of the men of today.  Everything among them speaks, everything is betrayed.  And what was once called a secret and a secrecy of profound souls, today belongs to the street-trumpeters and other butterflies.  O humankind, you strange thing! You noise in dark streets! Now again you lie behind me – my greatest danger lies behind me! My greatest danger always lay in indulgence and sufferance; and all humankind wants to be indulged and suffered.  With truths held back, with foolish hand and foolish-fond heart and rich in pity’s little lies – that is how I used to live among men.  I sat among them disguised, ready to misunderstand myself so that I might endure them , and glad to tell myself: ‘You fool, you do not know men!’ One forgets what one has learned about men when one lives among men: there is too much foreground in all men – what can far-seeing, far-seeking eyes do there ! And when they misunderstood me, I, like a fool, indulged them more than I did myself: for I was accustomed to being hard with myself and often even taking revenge on myself for this indulgence.  Stung by poisonous dies and hollowed out like a stone by many drops of wickedness: that is how I sat among them and still told myself: ‘Everything small is innocent of its smallness!’ Especially those who call themselves ‘the good’ did I discover to be the most poisonous flies: they sting in all innocence; how could they be – just towards me! Pity teaches him to lie who lives among the good.  Pity makes the air stifling for all free souls.  For the stupidity of the good is unfathomable.  To conceal myself and my riches – that did I learn down there: for I found everybody still poor in spirit.  It was my pity’s lie that I knew with everybody, that I saw and scented in everybody what was sufficient spirit for him and what was too much spirit for him! Their pedantic wise men: I called them wise, not pedantic – thus I learned to slur words.  Their gravediggers: I called them investigators and scholars – thus I learned to confound words.  Gravediggers dig diseases for themselves.  Evil vapours repose beneath old rubble.  One should not stir up the bog.  One should live upon mountains.  With happy nostrils I breathe again mountain-freedom! At last my nose is delivered from the odour of all humankind! My soul, tickled by sharp breezes as with sparkling wine, sneezes – sneezes and cries to itself: Bless you! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Rabble L IFE is a fountain of delight; but where the rabble also drinks all wells are poisoned.  I love all that is clean; but I do not like to see the grinning mouths and the thirst of the unclean.  They cast their eyes down into the well: now their repulsive smile glitters up to me out of the well.  They have poisoned the holy water with their lascivious-ness; and when they called their dirty dreams ‘delight’ they poisoned even the words, too.  The flame is unwilling to burn when they put their damp hearts to the fire; the spirit itself bubbles and smokes when the rabble approaches the fire.  The fruit grows mawkish and over-ripe in their hands: the fruit tree becomes unstable and withered at the top under their glance.  And many a one who turned away from life, turned away only from the rabble: he did not wish to share the well and the flame and the fruit with the rabble.  And many a one who went into the desert and suffered thirst with beasts of prey merely did not wish to sit around the cistern with dirty camel-drivers.  And many a one who came along like a destroyer and a shower of hail to all orchards wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of the rabble and so stop its throat.  And to know that life itself has need of enmity and dying and martyrdoms, that was not the mouthful that choked me most.  But I once asked, and my question almost stifled me: What, does life have need of the rabble, too? Are poisoned wells necessary, and stinking fires and dirty dreams and maggots in the bread of life? Not my hate but my disgust hungrily devoured my life! Alas, I often grew weary of the spirit when I found the rabble, too, had been gifted with spirit! And I turned my back upon the rulers when I saw what they now call ruling: bartering and haggling for power – with the rabble! I dwelt with stopped ears among peoples with a strange language: that the language of their bartering and their haggling for power might remain strange to me.  And I went ill-humouredly through all yesterdays and todays holding my nose: truly, all yesterdays and todays smell badly of the scribbling rabble! Like a cripple who has gone blind, deaf, and dumb: thus have I lived for a long time, that I might not live with the power-rabble, the scribbling-rabble, and the pleasure-rabble.  My spirit mounted steps wearily and warily; alms of delight were its refreshment; the blind man’s life crept along on a staff.  Yet what happened to me? How did I free myself from disgust? Who rejuvenated my eyes? How did I fly to the height where the rabble no longer sit at the well? Did my disgust itself create wings and water-divining powers for me? Truly, I had to fly to the extremest height to find again the fountain of delight! Oh, I have found it, my brothers! Here, in the extremest height, the fountain of delight gushes up for me! And here there is a life at which no rabble drinks with me! You gush up almost too impetuously, fountain of delight! And in wanting to fill the cup, you often empty it again! And I still have to learn to approach you more discreetly: my heart still flows towards you all-too-impetuously.  My heart, upon which my summer burns, a short, hot, melancholy, over-joyful summer: how my summer-heart longs for your coolness! Gone is the lingering affliction of my spring! Gone the malice of my snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and summer-noonday! A summer at the extremest height with cold fountains and blissful stillness: oh come, my friends, that the stillness may become more blissful yet! For this is our height and our home: we live too nobly and boldly 16 here for all unclean men and their thirsts.  Only cast your pure eyes into the well of my delight, friends! You will not dim its sparkle! It shall laugh back at you with its purity.  We build our nest in the tree Future; eagles shall bring food to us solitaries in their beaks! Truly, food in which no unclean men could join us! They would think they were eating fire and burn their mouths! Truly, we do not prepare a home here for unclean men! Their bodies and their spirits would call our happiness a cave of ice! So let us live above them like strong winds, neighbours of the eagles, neighbours of the snow, neighbours of the sun: that is how strong winds live.  And like a wind will I one day blow among them and with my spirit take away the breath from their spirit: thus my future will have it.  Truly, Zarathustra is a strong wind to all flatlands; and he offers this advice to his enemies and to all that spews and spits: ‘Take care not to spit against the wind!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Song of Melancholy 1 Z ARATHUSTRA was standing near the door of his cave as he spoke this discourse; with the final words, however, he escaped from his guests and fled for a short while into the open air.  ‘Oh pure odours around me,’ he exclaimed, ‘oh blissful stillness around me! But where are my animals? Come here, come here, my eagle and my serpent! ‘Tell me, my animals: all these Higher Men – do they perhaps not smell well? Oh pure odours around me! Only now do I know and feel how I love you, my animals.’ And Zarathustra said again: ‘I love you, my animals!’ But the eagle and the serpent pressed around him when he said these words, and looked up at him.  All three stood silently together in this attitude, and sniffed and breathed in the good air together.  For the air here outside was better than with the Higher Men.  2 Hardly had Zarathustra left his cave, however, when the old sorcerer got up, looked cunningly around, and said: He has gone out! And already, you Higher Men – if I may tickle you with this name of praise and flattery, as he does – already my evil spirit of deceit and sorcery attacks me, my melancholy devil, who is an adversary of this Zarathustra from the very heart: forgive him for it! Now he insists on working charms before you, now he has his hour; I wrestle in vain with this evil spirit.  To all of you, whatever honours you may bestow upon yourselves with words, whether you call yourselves ‘the free spirits’ or ‘the truthful’ or ‘the penitents of the spirit’ or ‘the unfettered’ or ‘the great desirers’, to all of you, like me, suffer from the great disgust , for whom the old God has died and as yet no new God lies in cradles and swaddling clothes – to all of you is my evil spirit and sorcery-devil well-disposed.  I know you, Higher Men, I know him – I also know this demon whom I love despite myself, this Zarathustra: he himself often seems to me like the beautiful mask of a saint, like a strange, new masquerade in which my evil spirit, the melancholy devil, takes pleasure – I love Zarathustra, so I often think, for the sake of my evil spirit.  But already he is attacking me and compelling me, this spirit of melancholy, this evening-twilight devil: and truly, you Higher Men, he has a desire – just open your eyes! – he has a desire to come naked , whether as man or woman I do not yet know: but he is coming, he is compelling me, alas! Open your senses! Day is fading away, now evening is coming to all things, even to the best things; listen now, and see, you Higher Men, what devil, whether man or woman, this spirit of evening melancholy is! Thus spoke the old sorcerer, looked cunningly around and then seized his harp.  3 When the air grows clear, When the dew’s comfort Rains down upon the earth, Invisible and unheard - For dew the comforter Wears tender shoes like all that gently comforts: Do you then remember, do you, hot heart, How once you thirsted For heavenly tears and dew showers, Thirsted, scorched and weary, While on yellow grassy paths Wicked evening sunlight-glances Ran about you through dark trees, Blinding, glowing sunlight-glances, malicious? ‘The wooer of truth? You?’ – so they jeered - ‘No! Only a poet! An animal, cunning, preying, creeping, That has to lie, That knowingly, wilfully has to lie: Lusting for prey, Motley-masked, A mask to itself, A prey to itself - That – the wooer of truth? No! Only a fool! Only a poet! Only speaking motley, Crying out of fools-masks, Stalking around on deceitful word-bridges, On motley rainbows, Between a false heaven And a false earth, Soaring, hovering about - Only a fool! Only a poet! That – the wooer of truth? Not still, stiff, smooth, cold, Become an image, Become a god’s statue, Not set up before temples, A god’s watchman: No! enemy to such statues of truth, More at home in any wilderness than before temples, Full of cat’s wantonness, Leaping through every window, Swiftly! into every chance, Sniffing out every jungle, Sniffing with greedy longing, That you may run, Sinfully-healthy and motley and fair, In jungles among motley-speckled beasts of prey, Run with lustful lips, Happily jeering, happily hellish, happily blood-thirsty, Preying, creeping, lying: Or like the eagle staring Long, long into abysses, Into its abysses: Oh how they circle down, Under and in, Into ever deeper depths! Then, Suddenly, with straight aim, Quivering flight, They pounce on lambs , Headlong down, ravenous, Lusting for lambs, Angry at all lamb-souls, Fiercely angry at all that look.  Sheepish, lamb-eyed, curly-woolled, Grey with lamb-sheep kindliness! Thus, Eagle like, panther like, Are the poet’s desires, Are your desires under a thousand masks, You fool! You poet! You saw man As God and sheep: To rend the God in man As the sheep in man, And in rending to laugh - That, that is your blessedness! A panther’s and eagle’s blessedness! A poet’s and fool’s blessedness!’ When the air grows clear, When the moon’s sickle Creeps along, green, Envious, in the purple twilight: Enemy to day, With every step secretly Sickling down The hanging rose-gardens, Until they sink, Sink down, pale, down to night: So sank I once From my delusion of truth, From my daytime longings, Weary of day, sick with light, Sank downwards, down to evening, down to shadows: Scorched and thirsty With one truth: Do you remember, do you, hot heart, How you thirsted then? That I am banished From all truth, Only a fool! Only a poet! Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Funeral Song ‘Y ONDER is the grave-island, the silent island; yonder too are the graves of my youth.  I will bear thither an evergreen wreath of life.’ Resolving thus in my heart I fared over the sea.  O, you sights and visions of my youth! O, all you glances of love, you divine momentary glances! 17 How soon you perished! Today I think of you as my dead ones.  A sweet odour comes to me from you, my dearest dead ones, a heart-easing odour that banishes tears.  Truly, it moves and eases the solitary seafarer’s heart.  Still am I the richest and most-to-be-envied man – I, the most solitary! For I had you and you have me still: tell me, to whom have such rosy apples fallen from the tree as have fallen to me? Still am I heir and heritage of your love, blooming to your memory with many-coloured wild-growing virtues, O my most beloved ones! Ah, we were made for one another, you gentle, strange marvels; and you came to me and my longing not as timid birds – no, you came trusting to me, who also trusted.  Yes, made for faithfulness, like me, and for tender eternities: must I now name you by your unfaithfulness, you divine glances and moments: I have as yet learned no other name.  Truly, you perished too soon, you fugitives.  Yet you did not fly from me, nor did I fly from you: we are innocent towards one another in our unfaithfulness.  They put you to death, you song-birds of my hopes, in order to kill me ! Yes, the arrows of malice were always directed at you, my beloved ones – in order to strike at my heart! And they struck! You were always my heart’s dearest, my possession and my being-possessed: therefore you had to die young and all-too-early! They shot the arrow at the most vulnerable thing I possessed: and that was you, whose skin is like down and even more like the smile that dies at a glance! But I will say this to my enemies: What is any manslaughter compared with what you did to me! You did a worse thing to me than any manslaughter; you took from me the irretrievable – thus I speak to you, my enemies! You murdered my youth’s visions and dearest marvels! You took from me my playfellows, those blessed spirits I To their memory do I lay this wreath and this curse.  This curse upon you, my enemies! You have cut short my eternity, as a note is cut short in the cold night! It came to me hardly as the twinkling of divine eyes – as a moment! Thus in a happy hour my purity once spoke: ‘All creatures shall be divine to me.’ Then you surprised me with foul phantoms; alas, whither has that happy hour fled now? ‘All days shall be holy to me’ – thus the wisdom of my youth once spoke: truly, the speech of a joyful wisdom! But then you, my enemies, stole my nights from me and sold them to sleepless torment: alas, whither has that joyful wisdom fled now? Once I longed for happy bird-auspices: then you led an owl-monster across my path, an adverse sign.  Alas, whither did my tender longings flee then? I once vowed to renounce all disgust; then you transformed my kindred and neighbours into abscesses.  Alas, whither did my noblest vow flee then? Once, as a blind man, I walked on happy paths; then you threw filth in the blind man’s path: and now die old footpath disgusts him.  And when I achieved my most difficult task and celebrated the victory of my overcomings: then you made those whom I loved cry out that I hurt them most.  Truly, all that was your doing: you embittered my finest honey and the industry of my finest bees.  You have always sent the most insolent beggars to my liberality; you have always crowded the incurably shameless around my pity.  Thus you have wounded my virtues’ faith.  And when I brought my holiest thing as a sacrifice, straightway your ‘piety’ placed its fatter gifts beside it: so that my holiest thing choked in the smoke of your fat.  And once I wanted to dance as I had never yet danced: I wanted to dance beyond all heavens.  Then you lured away my favourite singer.  And then he struck up a gruesome, gloomy melody: alas, he trumpeted into my ears like a mournful horn! Murderous singer, instrument of malice, most innocent man! I stood prepared for the finest dance: then you murdered my ecstasy with your tones! I know how to speak the parable of the highest things only in the dance – and now my greatest parable has remained in my limbs unspoken! My highest hope has remained unspoken and unachieved! And all the visions and consolations of my youth are dead! How did I endure it? How did I recover from such wounds, how did I overcome them? How did my soul arise again from these graves? Yes, something invulnerable, unburiable is within me, something that rends rocks: it is called my Will .  Silently it steps and unchanging through the years.  It shall go its course upon my feet, my old Will; hard of heart and invulnerable is its temper.  I am invulnerable only in my heels.  You live there and are always the same, most patient one! You will always break out of all graves! In you too still live on all the unachieved things of my youth; and you sit as life and youth, hopefully, here upon yellow grave-ruins.  Yes, you are still my destroyer of all graves: Hail, my Will! And only where there are graves are there resurrections.  Thus sang Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Tree on the Mountainside Z ARATHUSTRA had noticed that a young man was avoiding him.  And as he was walking alone one evening through the mountains surrounding the town called The Pied Cow, behold! he found this young man leaning against a tree and gazing wearily into the valley.  Zarathustra grasped the tree beside which the young man was sitting and spoke thus: ‘If I wanted to shake this tree with my hands I should be unable to do it.  ‘But the wind, which we cannot see, torments it and bends it where it wishes.  It is invisible hands that torment and bend us the worst.’ At that the young man stood up in confusion and said: ‘I hear Zarathustra and I was just thinking of him.’ Zarathustra replied: ‘Why are you alarmed on that account? – Now it is with men as with this tree.  ‘The more it wants to rise into the heights and the light, the more determinedly do its roots strive earthwards, downwards, into the darkness, into the depths – into evil.’ ‘Yes, into evil!’ cried the young man.  ‘How is it possible you can uncover my soul?’ Zarathustra smiled and said: ‘There are many souls one will never uncover, unless one invents them first.’ ‘Yes, into evill’ cried the young man again.  ‘You have spoken the truth, Zarathustra.  Since I wanted to rise into the heights I have no longer trusted myself, and no one trusts me any more.  How did this happen? ‘I change too quickly: my today refutes my yesterday.  When I ascend I often jump over steps, and no step forgives me that.  ‘When I am aloft, I always find myself alone.  No one speaks to me, the frost of solitude makes me tremble.  What do I want in the heights? ‘My contempt and my desire increase together; the higher I climb, the more do I despise him who climbs.  What do I want in the heights? ‘How ashamed I am of my climbing and stumbling! How I scorn my violent panting! How I hate the man who can fly! How weary I am in the heights!’ Here the young man fell silent.  And Zarathustra contemplated the tree beside which they were standing, and spoke thus: ‘This tree stands here alone on the mountainside; it has grown up high above man and animal.  ‘And if it wished to speak, it would find no one who understood it: so high has it grown.  ‘Now it waits and waits – yet what is it waiting for? It lives too near the seat of the clouds: is it waiting, perhaps, for the first lightning?’ When Zarathustra said this, the young man cried with violent gestures: ‘Yes, Zarathustra, you speak true.  I desired my destruction when I wanted to ascend into the heights, and you are the lightning for which I have been waiting! Behold, what have I been since you appeared among us? It is envy of you which has destroyed me!’ Thus spoke the young man and wept bitterly.  But Zarathustra kid his arm about him and drew him along with him.  And when they had been walking together for a while, Zarathustra began to speak thus: It breaks my heart.  Better than your words, your eye tells me all your peril.  You are not yet free, you still search for freedom.  Your search has fatigued you and made you too wakeful.  You long for the open heights, your soul thirsts for the stars.  But your bad instincts too thirst for freedom.  Your fierce dogs long for freedom; they bark for joy in their cellar when your spirit aspires to break open all prisons.  To me you are still a prisoner who imagines freedom: ah, such prisoners of the soul become clever, but also deceitful and base.  The free man of the spirit, too, must still purify himself.  Much of the prison and rottenness still remain within him: his eye still has to become pure.  Yes, I know your peril.  But, by my love and hope I entreat you: do not reject your love and hope! You still feel yourself noble, and the others, too, who dislike you and cast evil glances at you, still feel you are noble.  Learn that everyone finds the noble man an obstruction.  The good, too, find the noble man an obstruction: and even when they call him a good man they do so in order to make away with him.  The noble man wants to create new things and a new virtue.  The good man wants the old things and that the old things shall be preserved.  But that is not the danger for the noble man – that he may become a good man – but that he may become an impudent one, a derider, a destroyer.  Alas, I have known noble men who lost their highest hope.  And henceforth they slandered all high hopes.  Henceforth they lived impudently in brief pleasures, and they had hardly an aim beyond the day.  ‘Spirit is also sensual pleasure’ – thus they spoke.  Then the wings of their spirit broke: now it creeps around and it makes dirty what it feeds on.  Once they thought of becoming heroes: now they are sensualists.  The hero is to them an affliction and a terror.  But, by my love and hope I entreat you: do not reject the hero in your soul! Keep holy your highest hope! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra THUS SPOKE ZARATHUSTRA F RIEDRICH N IETZSCHE was born near Leipzig in 1844, the son of a Lutheran clergyman.  He attended the famous Pforta School, then went to university at Bonn and at Leipzig, where he studied philology and read Schopenhauer.  When he was only twenty-four he was appointed to the chair of classical philology at Basle University; he stayed there until his health forced him into retirement in 1879.  While at Basle he made and broke his friendship with Wagner, participated as an ambulance orderly in the Franco-Prussian War, and published The Birth of Tragedy (1872), Untimely Meditations (1873–6) and the first part of Human, All Too Human (1878; two supplements entitled Assorted Opinions and Maxims and The Wanderer and his Shadow followed in 1879 and 1880 respectively).  From 1880 until his final collapse in 1889, except for brief interludes, he divorced himself from everyday life and, supported by his university pension, he lived mainly in France, Italy and Switzerland.  The Dawn appeared in 1881 followed by The Gay Science in the autumn of 1882.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra was written between 1883 and 1885, and his last completed books were Ecce Homo , an autobiography, and Nietzsche contra Wagner .  He became insane in 1889 and remained in a condition of mental and physical paralysis until his death in 1900.  R.  J.  H OLLINGDALE translated eleven of Nietzsche’ books and published two books about him; he also translated works by, among others, Schopenhauer, Goethe, E.  T.  A.  Hoffman, Lichtenberg and Theodor Fontane, many of these for Penguin Classics.  He was the honorary president of the British Nietzsche Society.  R.  J.  Hollingdale died on 28 September 2001.  In its obituary The Times described him as ‘Britain’s foremost postwar Nietzsche specialist’ and the Guardian paid tribute to his ‘inspired gift for German translation’.  Richard Gott wrote that he ‘brought fresh generations – through fluent and intelligent translation – to read and relish Nietzsche’s inestimable thought’.  Cover Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Virtue that Makes Small 1 W HEN Zarathustra was again on firm land he did not go off straightway to his mountains and his cave, but made many journeys and asked many questions and inquired of this and that, so that he said jokingly of himself: ‘Behold a river that flows back to its source through many meanderings!’ For he wanted to learn what had been happening to men while he had been away: whether they had become bigger or smaller.  And once he saw a row of new houses, and he marvelled and said: What do these houses mean? Truly, no great soul put them up as its image! Did a silly child perhaps take them out of its toy-box? If only another child would put them back into its box! And these sitting-rooms and bedrooms: are men able to go in and out of them? They seem to have been made for dolls; or for dainty nibblers who perhaps let others nibble with them.  And Zarathustra stopped and considered.  At length he said sadly: ‘ Everything has become smaller! ‘Everywhere I see lower doors: anyone like me can still pass through them, but – he has to stoop! ‘Oh when shall I return to my home, where I shall no longer have to stoop – shall no longer have to stoop before the small men ’! And Zarathustra sighed and gazed into the distance.  The same day, however, he spoke his discourse upon the virtue that makes small.  2 I go among this people and keep my eyes open: they do not forgive me that I am not envious of their virtues.  They peck at me because I tell them: For small people small virtues are necessary – and because it is hard for me to understand that small people are necessary ! Here I am still like a cockerel in a strange farmyard, who is pecked at even by the hens; but I am not unfriendly to these hens on that account.  I am polite towards them, as towards every small vexation; to be prickly towards small things seems to me the wisdom of a hedgehog.  They all talk of me when they sit around the fire at evening – they talk of me, but no one thinks – of me! This is the new silence I have learned: their noise about me spreads a cloak over my thoughts.  They bluster among themselves: ‘What does this gloomy cloud want with us? Let us see that it does not bring us a pestilence!’ And recently a woman pulled back her child when it was coming towards me: ‘Take the children away!’ she cried; ‘such eyes scorch children’s souls.’ They cough when I speak: they think that coughing is an objection to strong winds – they know nothing of the raging of my happiness! ‘We have no time yet for Zarathustra’ – thus they object; but of what consequence is a time that ‘has no time’ for Zarathustra? And should they even praise me: how could I rest on their praise? Their praise is a barbed girdle to me: it scratches me even when I take it off.  And I have learned this, too, among them: he who praises appears to be giving back, in truth however he wants to be given more! Ask my foot if it likes their melodies of praise and enticement! Truly, to such a measure and tick-tock beat it likes neither to dance nor to stand still.  They would like to lure and commend me to small virtue; they would like to persuade my foot to the tick-tock measure of a small happiness.  I go among this people and keep my eyes open: they have become smaller and are becoming ever smaller: and their doctrine of happiness and virtue is the cause .  For they are modest even in virtue – for they want ease.  But only a modest virtue is compatible with ease.  To be sure, even they learn in their own way how to stride and to stride forward: that is what I call their limping .  Therewith they become a hindrance to anyone who is in a hurry.  And some of them go forward and at the same time look backward with a stiff neck: I like to run up against them.  Foot and eye should not lie, nor give one another the lie.  But there is much lying among the small people.  Some of them will , but most of them are only willed .  Some of them are genuine, but most of them are bad actors.  There are unconscious actors among them and involuntary actors – the genuine are always rare, especially genuine actors.  There is little manliness here: therefore their women make themselves manly.  For only he who is sufficiently a man will – redeem the woman in woman.  And I have found this hypocrisy the worst among them: that even those who command affect the virtues of those who obey.  ‘I serve, you serve, we serve’ – so here even the hypocrisy of the rulers intones – and alas, if the first ruler is only the first servant! Ah, my eyes’ curiosity has strayed even into their hypocrisies; and I have divined well all their fly-happiness and their humming around sunny window-panes.  I see as much weakness as goodness.  As much weakness as justice and pity.  They are frank, honest, and kind to one another, as grains of sand are frank, honest, and kind to grains of sand.  To embrace modestly a little happiness – that they call ‘submission’! And at the same time they are looking out for a new little happiness.  Fundamentally they want one thing most of all: that nobody shall do them harm.  So they steal a march on everyone and do good to everyone.  This, however, is cowardice : although it be called ‘virtue’.  And when they speak harshly, these little people, I hear in it only their hoarseness – every draught, in fact, makes them hoarse.  They are clever, their virtues have clever fingers.  But they lack fists, their fingers do not know how to fold into fists.  To them, virtue is what makes modest and tame: with it they make the wolf into a dog and man himself into man’s best domestic animal.  ‘We have set our chairs down in the middle ’ – that is what their smirking tells me – ‘and as far away from dying warriors as from contented swine.’ This, however, is – mediocrity : although it be called moderation.  3 I go among this people and let fall many a word; but they know neither how to take nor to keep.  They are surprised that I have not come to rail at their lusts and vices; and truly, I have not come to warn against pickpockets, either! They are surprised that I am not prepared to improve and sharpen their cleverness: as if they had not already sufficient wiseacres, whose voices grate on me like slate-pencils! And when I cry: ‘Curse all the cowardly devils within you who would like to whimper and clasp their hands and worship,’ then they cry: ‘Zarathustra is godless.’ And this is especially the cry of their teachers of submission; but it is into precisely their ears that I love to shout: Yes! I am Zarathustra the Godless! These teachers of submission! Wherever there is anything small and sick and scabby, there they crawl like lice; and only my disgust stops me from cracking them.  Well then! This is my sermon for their ears: I am Zarathustra the Godless, who says ‘Who is more godless than I, that I may rejoice in his teaching?’ I am Zarathustra the Godless: where shall I find my equal? All those who give themselves their own will and renounce all submission, they are my equals.  I am Zarathustra the Godless: I cook every chance in my pot.  And only when it is quite cooked do I welcome it as my food.  And truly, many a chance came imperiously to me: but my will spoke to it even more imperiously, then it went down imploringly on its knees – imploring shelter and love with me, and urging in wheedling tones: ‘Just see, O Zarathustra, how a friend comes to a friend!’ But why do I speak where no one has my kind of ears? And so I will shout it out to all the winds: You will become smaller and smaller, you small people! You will crumble away, you comfortable people! You will yet perish – through your many small virtues, through your many small omissions, through your many small submissions! Too indulgent, too yielding: that is the state of your soil! But in order to grow big , a tree wants to strike hard roots into hard rocks! Even what you omit weaves at the web of mankind’s future; even your nothing is a spider’s web and a spider that lives on the future’s blood.  And when you take, it is like stealing, you small virtuous people; but even among rogues, honour says: ‘One should steal only where one cannot plunder.’ ‘It is given’ – that is also a doctrine of submission.  But I tell you, you comfortable people: it is taken , and will be taken more and more from you! 29 Oh, that you would put from you all half willing, and decide upon lethargy as you do upon action! Oh, that you understood my saying: ‘Always do what you will – but first be such as can will! ‘Always love your neighbour as yourselves – but first be such as love themselves – ‘such as love with a great love, such as love with a great contempt!’ Thus speaks Zarathustra the Godless.  But why do I speak where no one has my kind of ears? Here it is yet an hour too early for me.  Among this people I am my own forerunner, my own cock-crow through dark lanes.  But their hour is coming! And mine too is coming! Hourly will they become smaller, poorer, more barren – poor weeds! poor soil! And soon they shall stand before me like arid grass and steppe, and truly! weary of themselves – and longing for fire rather than for water! O blessed hour of the lightning! O mystery before noontide! One day I shall turn them into running fire and heralds with tongues of flame – one day they shall proclaim with tongues of flame: It is coming, it is near, the great noontide ! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Before Sunrise O SKY above me! O pure, deep sky! You abyss of light! Gazing into you, I tremble with divine desires.  To cast myself into your height – that is my depth! To hide myself in your purity – that is my innocence! The god is veiled by his beauty: thus you hide your stars.  You do not speak: thus you proclaim to me your wisdom.  You have risen for me today, mute over the raging sea; your love and your modesty speak a revelation to my raging soul.  That you have come to me, beautiful, veiled in your beauty; that you have spoken to me mutely, manifest in your wisdom: Oh how should I not divine all that is modest in your soul! You came to me before the sun, to me the most solitary man.  We have been friends from the beginning: we have grief and terror and world in common; we have even the sun in common.  We do not speak to one another, because we know too much: we are silent together, we smile our knowledge to one another.  Are you not the light of my fire? Do you not have the sister-soul of my insight? Together we learned everything; together we learned to mount above ourselves to ourselves and to smile uncloudedly – to smile uncloudedly down from bright eyes and from miles away when under us compulsion and purpose and guilt stream like rain.  And when I wandered alone, what did my soul hunger after by night and on treacherous paths? And when I climbed mountains, whom did I always seek, if not you, upon mountains? And all my wandering and mountain-climbing: it was merely a necessity and an expedient of clumsiness: my whole will desires only fly , to fly into you ! And what have I hated more than passing clouds and all that defiles you? And I have hated even my own hatred, because it defiled you! I dislike the passing clouds, these stealthy cats of prey: they take from you and from me what we have in common – the vast and boundless declaration of Yes and Amen.  We dislike these mediators and mixers, the passing clouds: these half-and-halfers, who have learned neither to bless nor to curse from the heart.  I would rather sit in a barrel under a closed sky, rather sit in an abyss without a sky, than see you, luminous sky, defiled by passing clouds! And often I longed to bind them fast with jagged golden wires of lightning, so that I, like the thunder, might drum upon their hollow bellies – an angry drummer, because they rob me of your Yes! and Amen! O sky above me, you pure sky! You luminous sky! You abyss of light! – because they rob me of my Yes! and Amen! For I would rather have noise and thunder and storm-curses than this cautious, uncertain feline repose; and among men, too, I hate most all soft-walkers and half-and-halfers and uncertain, hesitating passing clouds.  And ‘He who cannot bless shall learn to curse!’ – this clear teaching fell to me from the dear sky, this star stands in my sky even on dark nights.  I, however, am one who blesses and declares Yes, if only you are around me, you pure, luminous sky! You abyss of light I – then into all abysses do I carry my consecrating declaration Yes.  I have become one who blesses and one who declares Yes: and for that I wrestled long and was a wrestler, so that I might one day have my hands free for blessing.  This, however, is my blessing: To stand over everything as its own sky, as its round roof, its azure bell and eternal certainty: and happy is he who thus blesses! For all things are baptized at the fount of eternity and beyond good and evil; good and evil themselves, however, are only intervening shadows and damp afflictions and passing clouds.  Truly, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach: ‘Above all things stands the heaven of chance, the heaven of innocence, the heaven of accident, the heaven of wantonness.’ 27 ‘Lord Chance’ 28 – he is the world’s oldest nobility, which I have given back to all things; I have released them from servitude under purpose.  I set this freedom and celestial cheerfulness over all things like an azure bell when I taught that no ‘eternal will’ acts over them and through them.  I set this wantonness and this foolishness in place of that will when I taught: ‘With all things one thing is impossible – rationality!’ A little reason, to be sure, a seed of wisdom scattered from star to star – this leaven is mingled with all things: for the sake of foolishness is wisdom mingled with all things! A little wisdom is no doubt possible; but I have found this happy certainty in all things: that they prefer – to dance on the feet of chance.  O sky above me, you pure, lofty sky! This is now your purity to me, that there is no eternal reason-spider and spider’s web in you – that you are to me a dance floor for divine chances, that you are to me a gods’ table for divine dice and dicers! But are you blushing? Did I say something unspeakable? Did I slander you when I meant to bless you? Or is it the shame of our being together which makes you blush? Are you telling me to go and be silent because now – day is coming? The world is deep: and deeper than day has ever comprehended.  Not everything may be spoken in the presence of day.  But day is coming: so let us part! O sky above me, you modest, glowing sky! O you, my happiness before sunrise! Day is coming: so let us part! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra NIETZSCHE Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Preachers of Death T HERE are preachers of death: and the earth is full of those to whom departure from life must be preached.  The earth is full of the superfluous, life has been corrupted by the many-too-many.  Let them be lured by ‘eternal life’ out of this life! Yellow men or black men: that is what the preachers of death are called.  But I want to show them to you in other colours.  There are the dreadful creatures who carry a beast of prey around within them, and have no choice except lusts or self-mortification.  And even their lusts are self-mortification.  They have not yet even become men, these dreadful creatures.  Let them preach departure from life and depart themselves! There are the consumptives of the soul: they are hardly born before they begin to die and to long for doctrines of weariness and renunciation.  They would like to be dead, and we should approve their wish! Let us guard against awakening these dead men and damaging these living coffins.  They encounter an invalid or an old man or a corpse; and straightway they say ‘Life is refuted!’ But only they are refuted, they and their eye that sees only one aspect of existence.  Muffled in deep depression, and longing for the little accidents that bring about death: thus they wait and clench their teeth.  Or: they snatch at sweets and in doing so mock their childishness: they cling to their straw of life and mock that they are still clinging to a straw.  Their wisdom runs: ‘He who goes on living is a fool, but we are such fools! And precisely that is the most foolish thing in life!’ ‘Life is only suffering’ – thus others of them speak, and they do not lie: so see to it that you ’ cease to live! So see to it that the life which is only suffering ceases! And let the teaching of your virtue be: ‘You shall kill yourself! You shall steal away from yourself!’ ‘Lust is sin’ – thus say some who preach death – ‘let us go aside and beget no children!’ ‘Giving birth is laborious’ – say others – ‘why go on giving birth? One gives birth only to unhappy children!’ And they too are preachers of death.  ‘Men are to be pitied’ – thus say others again.  ‘Take what I have! Take what I am! By so much less am I bound to life!’ If they were compassionate from the very heart they would seek to make their neighbours disgusted with life.  To be evil -that would be their true good.  But they want to escape from life: what is it to them that, with their chains and gifts, they bind others still more firmly to it? And you too, you to whom life is unrestrained labour and anxiety: are you not very weary of life? Are you not very ripe for the sermon of death? All of you, to whom unrestrained labour, and the swift, the new, the strange, are dear, you endure yourselves ill, your industry is flight and will to forget yourselves.  If you believed more in life, you would devote yourselves less to the moment.  But you have insufficient capacity for waiting – or even for laziness! Everywhere resound the voices of those who preach death: and the earth is full of those to whom death must be preached.  Or ‘eternal life’: it is all the same to me – provided they pass away quickly! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Dance Song O NE evening Zarathustra was walking through the forest with his disciples; and as he was looking for a well, behold, he came upon a green meadow quietly surrounded by trees and bushes: and in the meadow girls were dancing together.  As soon as the girls recognized Zarathustra they ceased their dance; Zarathustra, however, approached them with a friendly air and spoke these words: Do not cease your dance, sweet girls! No spoil-sport has come to you with an evil eye, no enemy of girls.  I am God’s advocate with the Devil; he, however, is the Spirit of Gravity.  How could I be enemy to divine dancing, you nimble creatures? or to girls’ feet with fair ankles? To be sure, I am a forest and a night of dark trees: but he who is not afraid of my darkness will find rosebowers too under my cypresses.  And he will surely find too the little god whom girls love best: he lies beside the fountain, still, with his eyes closed.  Truly, he has fallen asleep in broad daylight, the idler! Has he been chasing butterflies too much? Do not be angry with me, fair dancers, if I chastise the little god a little I Perhaps he will cry out and weep, but he is laughable even in weeping! And with tears in his eyes, he shall ask you for a dance; and I myself will sing a song for his dance.  A dance-song and a mocking-song on the Spirit of Gravity, my supreme, most powerful devil, who they say is ‘the lord of the earth’.  And this is the song Zarathustra sang as cupid and the girls danced together: Lately I looked into your eye, O Life! And I seemed to sink into the unfathomable.  But you pulled me out with a golden rod; you laughed mockingly when I called you unfathomable.  ‘All fish talk like that,’ you said; ‘what they cannot fathom is unfathomable.  ‘But I am merely changeable and untamed and in everything a woman, and no virtuous one.  ‘Although you men call me “profound” or “faithful”, “eternal”, “mysterious”.  ‘But you men always endow us with your own virtues – ah, you virtuous men!’ Thus she laughed, the incredible woman; but I never believe her and her laughter when she speaks evil of herself.  And when I spoke secretly with my wild Wisdom, she said to me angrily: ‘You will, you desire, you love, that is the only reason you praise Life!’ Then I almost answered crossly and told the truth to my angry Wisdom; and one cannot answer more crossly than when one ‘tells the truth’ to one’s Wisdom.  This then is the state of affairs between us three.  From the heart of me I love only Life – and in truth, I love her most of all when I hate her! But that I am fond of Wisdom, and often too fond, is because she very much reminds me of Life! She has her eyes, her laughter, and even her little golden fishing-rod: how can I help it that they both look so alike? And when Life once asked me: ‘Who is she then, this Wisdom?’ – then I said eagerly: ‘Ah yes! Wisdom! ‘One thirsts for her and is not satisfied, one looks at her through veils, one snatches at her through nets.  ‘Is she fair? I know not! But the cleverest old fish are still lured by her.  ‘She is changeable and defiant; I have often seen her bite her lip and comb her hair against the grain.  ‘Perhaps she is wicked and false, and in everything a wench; but when she speaks ill of herself, then precisely is she most seductive.’ When I said this to Life, she laughed maliciously and closed her eyes.  ‘But whom are you speaking of?’ she asked, ‘of me, surely? ‘And if you are right – should you tell me that to my face? But now speak of your Wisdom, too!’ Ah, and then you opened your eyes again, O beloved Life! And again I seemed to sink into the unfathomable.  Thus sang Zarathustra.  But when the dance had ended and the girls had gone away, he grew sad.  The sun has long since set (he said at last); the meadow is damp, coolness is coming from the forests.  Something strange and unknown is about me, looking thoughtfully at me.  What I are you still living, Zarathustra? Why? Wherefore? Whereby? Whither? Where? How? Is it not folly to go on living? Ah, my friends, it is the evening that questions thus within me..  Forgive me my sadness! Evening has come: forgive me that it has become evening! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Science T HUS sang the sorcerer; and all who were present went like birds unawares into the net of his cunning and melancholy voluptuousness.  Only the conscientious man of the spirit was not captured: he quickly snatched the harp away from the sorcerer and cried: ‘Air! Let in good air! Let Zarathustra in! You are making this cave sultry and poisonous, you evil old sorcerer! ‘You seduce to unknown desires and wildernesses, you false, subtle man.  And alas, when such as you chatter and make ado about truth ! ‘Woe to all free spirits who are not on their guard against such sorcerers! Their freedom is done with: you teach and lure back into prisons, ‘you old melancholy devil, a luring bird-call sounds from your lamenting, you are like those who with their praise of chastity secretly invite to voluptuousness!’ Thus spoke the conscientious man of the spirit; the old sorcerer, however, looked around him, enjoyed his victory, and on that account swallowed the displeasure the conscientious man had caused him.  ‘Be quiet!’ he said in a modest voice, ‘good songs want to echo well; one should be long silent after good songs.  ‘That is what all of them are doing, these Higher Men.  But you, perhaps, have understood little of my song? There is little of the spirit of sorcery in you.’ ‘You praise me’, replied the conscientious man, ‘when you separate me from yourself.  Very well! But you others, what do I see? You are all sitting there with lustful eyes: ‘You free souls, where has your freedom fled! You almost seem like men who have been gazing long at wicked girls dancing naked: your very souls are dancing! ‘There must be more of that which the sorcerer called his evil spirit of sorcery and deceit in you, you Higher Men -we must surely be different.  ‘And truly, we talked and thought together enough, before Zarathustra came home to his cave, for me to know: we are different.  ‘We seek different things – even up here, you and I.  For I seek more security , that is why I came to Zarathustra.  For he is still the surest tower and will ‘ – today, when everything is tottering, when all the earth quakes.  But you, when I see what eyes you make, almost seem to me to be seeking more insecurity , ‘more horror, more danger, more earthquaking.  You have a desire, I almost think, forgive me my presumption, you Higher Men, ‘you have a desire for the worst, most dangerous kind of life that terrifies me the most, for the life of wild animals, for the forests, caves, steep mountains, and labyrinths.  ‘And it is not those who lead out of danger that please you best, but those who lead you astray from all paths, the misleaders.  But if you actually harbour such desires, they seem to me, nevertheless, to be impossible .  ‘For fear – that is man’s original and fundamental sensation; everything is explained by fear, original sin and original virtue.  From fear grew also my virtue, which is called: science.  ‘For fear of wild animals – that has been fostered in man the longest, including the animal he hides and fears within himself- Zarathustra calls it “the beast within”.  ‘This protracted, ancient fear at length grown subtle, spiritual, intellectual – today, it seems to me, it is called: science .’ Thus spoke the conscientious man; but Zarathustra, who had just come back to his cave and had heard and understood the last discourse, threw the conscientious man a handful of roses and laughed at his ‘truths’.  ‘What,’ he cried, ‘what did I just hear? Truly, I think you are a fool, or I myself am one: and I shall straightway stand your “truth” on its head.  ‘For fear – is the exception with us.  Courage, however, and adventure and joy in the unknown, the unattempted – courage seems to me the whole pre-history of man.  ‘He has envied the wildest, most courageous animals all their virtues and robbed them of them: only thus did he become – man.  ‘This courage, at length grown subtle, spiritual, intellectual, this human courage with eagle’s wings and serpent’s wisdom: this , it seems to me, is today called – ’ ‘Zarathustra !’ all those sitting together cried as if from a single mouth and burst into a great peal of laughter; and it was as if a heavy cloud had risen from off them.  Even the sorcerer laughed and said prudently: ‘Well! My evil spirit has departed! ‘And did I myself not warn you against him, when I said he was a deceiver, a spirit of deceit and lies? ‘And especially when he shows himself naked.  But how can I prevent his pranks I Did I create him and the world? ‘Very well! Let us be good again and of good cheer I And although Zarathustra looks ill-temperedly – just see him! he is angry with me: ‘before night comes he will again learn to love and praise me, he cannot live long without committing such follies.  ‘He – loves his enemies: he understands this art better than anyone I have seen.  But he takes revenge for that – on his friends!’ Thus spoke the old sorcerer, and the Higher Men applauded him: so that Zarathustra went round and mischievously and lovingly shook hands with his friends, like one who has to make amends and apologize to everyone for something.  As he came to the door of his cave, however, he already felt again a desire for the good air outside and for his animals, and he was about to slip out.  The Myth of Sisyphus Contents Cover About the Author Other Titles Title Page Copyright Preface Contents The Myth of Sisyphus An Absurd Reasoning Absurdity and Suicide Absurd Walls Philosophical Suicide Absurd Freedom The Absurd Man Don Juanism Drama Conquest Absurd Creation Philosophy and Fiction Kirilov Ephemeral Creation The Myth of Sisyphus Appendix: Hope and the Absurd in the Work of Franz Kafka i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x xi xii xiii 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 Cover Cover Title Page Table of Contents Start Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Tarantulas S EE, this is the tarantula’s cave! Do you want to see the tarantula itself? Here hangs its web: touch it and make it tremble.  Here it comes docilely: Welcome, tarantula! Your triangle and symbol sit black upon your back; and I know too what sits within your soul.  Revenge sits within your soul: a black scab grows wherever you bite; with revenge your poison makes the soul giddy! Thus do I speak to you in parables, you who make the soul giddy, you preachers of equality ! You are tarantulas and dealers in hidden revengefulness! But I will soon bring your hiding places to light: therefore I laugh my laughter of the heights in your faces.  I pull at your web that your rage may lure you from your cave of lies and your revenge may bound forward from behind your word ‘justice’.  For that man may be freed from the bonds of revenge : that is the bridge to my highest hope and a rainbow after protracted storms.  But, naturally, the tarantulas would have it differently.  ‘That the world may become full of the storms of our revenge, let precisely that be called justice by us’ – thus they talk together.  ‘We shall practise revenge and outrage against all who are not as we are’ – thus the tarantula-hearts promise themselves.  ‘And “will to equality” – that itself shall henceforth be the name of virtue; and we shall raise outcry against everything that has power!’ You preachers of equality, thus from you the tyrant-madness of impotence cries for ‘equality’: thus your most secret tyrant-appetite disguises itself in words of virtue.  Soured self-conceit, repressed envy, perhaps your fathers’ self-conceit and envy: they burst from you as a flame and madness of revenge.  What the father kept silent the son speaks out; and I often found the son the father’s revealed secret.  They resemble inspired men: but it is not the heart that inspires them – it is revenge.  And when they become refined and cold, it is not their mind, it is their envy that makes them refined and cold.  Their jealousy leads them upon thinkers’ paths too; and this is the mark of their jealousy – they always go too far: so that their weariness has at last to lie down and sleep even on the snow.  Revenge rings in all their complaints, a malevolence is in all their praise; and to be judge seems bliss to them.  Thus, however, I advise you, my friends: Mistrust all in whom the urge to punish is strong! They are people of a bad breed and a bad descent; the executioner and the bloodhound peer from out their faces.  Mistrust all those who talk much about their justice! Truly, it is not only honey that their souls lack.  And when they call themselves ‘the good and just’, do not forget that nothing is lacking to make them into Pharisees except – power! My friends, I do not want to be confused with others or taken for what I am not.  There are those who preach my doctrine of life: yet are at the same time preachers of equality, and tarantulas.  That they speak well of life, these poison spiders, although they sit in their caves and with their backs turned on life, is because they want to do harm by speaking well of life.  They want to do harm to those who now possess power: for with those the preaching of death is still most at home.  If it were otherwise, the tarantulas would teach otherwise: and it is precisely they who were formerly the best world-slanderers and heretic-burners.  I do not want to be confused with these preachers of equality, nor taken for one of them.  For justice speaks thus to me : ‘Men are not equal.’ And they should not become so, either! For what were my love of the Superman if I spoke otherwise? They should press on to the future across a thousand bridges and gangways, and there should be more and more war and inequality among them: thus my great love makes me speak! They should become devisers of emblems and phantoms in their enmity, and with their emblems and phantoms they should fight together the supreme fight! Good and evil, and rich and poor, and noble and mean, and all the names of the virtues: they should be weapons and ringing symbols that life must overcome itself again and again! Life wants to raise itself on high with pillars and steps; it wants to gaze into the far distance and out upon joyful splendour – that is why it needs height! And because it needs height, it needs steps and conflict between steps and those who climb them! Life wants to climb and in climbing overcome itself.  And just look, my friends! Here, where the tarantula’s cave is, there rises up the ruins of an old temple – just look at it with enlightened eyes! Truly, he who once towered up his thoughts in stone here knew as well as the wisest about the secret of all life! That there is battle and inequality and war for power and predominance even in beauty: he teaches us that here in the dearest parable.  How divinely vault and arch here oppose one another in the struggle: how they strive against one another with light and shadow, these divinely-striving things.  Beautiful and assured as these, let us also be enemies, my friends! Let us divinely strive against one another! Ha! Now the tarantula, my old enemy, has bitten me! Divinely beautiful and assured, it bit me in the finger! ‘There must be punishment and justice’ – thus it thinks: ‘here he shall not sing in vain songs in honour of enmity!’ Yes, the tarantula has revenged itself I And alas, now it will make my soul, too, giddy with revenge! But so that I may not veer round, tie me tight to this pillar, my friends! I would rather be even a pillar-saint than a whirlpool of revengefulness! Truly, Zarathustra is no veering wind nor whirlwind; and although he is a dancer, he is by no means a tarantella dancer! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Apostates 1 A LAS , everything that lately stood green and motley in this meadow already lies faded and grey! And how much honey of hope have I carried from here into my beehives! All these young hearts have already grown old – and not even old! only weary, common, comfortable: they describe it: ‘We have grown pious again.’ But lately I saw them running out in the early morning with bold feet: but the feet of their knowledge grew weary and now they slander even their morning boldness! Truly, many of them once lifted their legs like a dancer, the laughter in my wisdom beckoned to them: then they considered.  And now I have seen them bent – to creep to the Cross.  Once they fluttered around light and freedom like flies and young poets.  A little older, a little colder: and already they are mystifiers and mutterers and stay-at-homes.  Did their hearts perhaps despair because solitude devoured me like a whale? Did their ears perhaps listen long and longingly in vain for me and for my trumpet and herald calls? Alas! They are always few whose heart possesses a long-enduring courage and wantonness; and in such, the spirit, too, is patient.  The remainder, however, are cowardly .  The remainder: that is always the majority, the commonplace, the superfluity, the many-too-many – all these are cowardly! He who is of my sort will also encounter experiences of my sort, so that his first companions must be corpses and buffoons.  His second companions, however, will call themselves his believers : a lively flock, full of love, full of folly, full of adolescent adoration.  He among men who is of my sort should not grapple his heart to these believers; he who knows fickle-cowardly human nature should not believe in these springs and many-coloured meadows! If they could do otherwise, they would choose otherwise.  The half-and-half spoil every whole.  Why complain because leaves wither? Let them fall, let them go, O Zarathustra, and do not complain I Rather blow among them with rustling winds – blow among these leaves, O Zarathustra: so that all that is withered may run from you the faster.  2 ‘We have grown pious again’ – thus these apostates confess; and many of them are still too cowardly to confess it.  I look into their eyes, then I tell them to their face and to the blushes of their cheeks: You are those who again pray ! But it is a disgrace to pray! Not for everyone, but for you and me and for whoever else has his conscience in his head.  For joy it is a disgrace to pray! You know it well: the cowardly devil in you who would like to clasp his hands and to fold his arms and to take it easier: – it was this cowardly devil who persuaded you: ‘There is a God!’ Through that , however, have you become one of those who dread the light, whom light never lets rest; now you must stick your head deeper every day into night and fog! And truly, you have chosen well the hour: for even now the night-birds have again flown out.  The hour has arrived for all people who fear the light, the evening hour of ease when there is no – ‘ease’ for them.  I hear and smell it: the hour for their chase and procession has arrived; not indeed for a wild chase, but for a tame, lame, snuffling, soft-walker’s and soft-prayer’s chase – for a chase after soulful hypocrites: all mousetraps of the heart have now again been set! And wherever I raise a curtain, a little night-moth comes fluttering out.  Has it perhaps been crouching there with another little night-moth? For everywhere I smell little hidden communities; and wherever there are closets, there are new devotees in them and the atmosphere of devotees.  They sit together on long evenings and say: ‘Let us again become as little children and say Dear God!’ – ruined in mouth and stomach by the pious confectioners.  Or they observe on long evenings a cunning, lurking Cross-spider, which preaches prudence to the spiders themselves and teaches: ‘There is good spinning under Crosses!’ Or they sit all day with fishing-rods beside swamps and for that reason think themselves deep; but he who fishes where there are no fish I do not call even superficial! Or they learn to play the harp in pious-joyful style with a song-poet who would like to harp his way into the hearts of young women – for he has grown weary of the old women and their praises.  Or they learn to shudder with a learned half-madman who waits in darkened rooms so that the spirits may come to him – and the spirit 30 has quite departed! Or they listen to an old, roving, whistling tramp who has learned from the distressful winds the distress of tones; now he whistles like the wind and preaches distress in distressful tones.  And some of them have even become night-watchmen: now they know how to blow horns and to go around at night and awaken old things that have long been asleep.  I heard five sayings about old things last night beside the garden wall: they came from such old, distressed, dried-up night-watchmen: ‘For a father he does not look after his children enough: human fathers do it better!’ ‘He is too old! He no longer looks after his children at all’-thus the other night-watchman answered.  ‘Has he any children? No one can prove it, if he doesn’t prove it himself! I have long wished he would prove it thoroughly for once.’ ‘Prove it? As if he has ever proved anything! He finds it hard to prove things; he thinks it very important that people should believe him.’ ‘Yes, yes! Belief makes him happy, belief in him.  Old people are like that I So shall we be, too!’ Thus the two old night-watchmen and light-scarecrows spoke together and thereupon blew their horns distressfully: so it happened last night beside the garden wall.  My heart, however, writhed with laughter and was like to break and knew not where to go and sank into the midriff.  Truly, it will yet be the death of me, to choke with laughter when I see asses intoxicated and hear night-watchmen thus doubt God.  For has not the time for all such doubts long since passed? Who may still awaken such old, sleeping, light-shunning things! With the old gods, they have long since met their end – and truly, they had a fine, merry, divine ending! They did not ‘fade away in twilight’ 31 – that is a lie! On the contrary: they once – laughed themselves to death! That happened when the most godless saying proceeded from a god himself, the saying: ‘There is one God! You shall have no other gods before me!’ – an old wrath-beard of a god, a jealous god, thus forgot himself: And all the gods laughed then and rocked in their chairs and cried: ‘Is not precisely this godliness, that there are gods but no God?’ He who has ears to hear, let him hear.  Thus spoke Zarathustra in the town which he loved and which is called ‘The Pied Cow’.  For from here he had only two days to go before arriving again at his cave and his animals; and his soul rejoiced continually at the nearness of his home-coming.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Voluntary Beggar W HEN Zarathustra had left the ugliest man he felt chilled and alone: for he had absorbed much coldness and loneliness, to such an extent that even his limbs had grown colder.  But he climbed on, up hill, down dale, past green pastures but also over wild, stony courses where no doubt an impatient brook had formerly made its bed: then all at once he grew warmer and more cheerful.  ‘What has happened to me?’ he asked himself.  ‘Something warm and living refreshes me, it must be nearby.  ‘Already I am less alone; unknown companions and brothers circle about me, their warm breath touches my soul.’ But when he peered about him and sought the comforters of his loneliness, behold, they were cows standing together on a hillock; it was their nearness and odour that had warmed his heart.  These cows, however, seemed to be listening eagerly to a speaker, and paid no heed to him who approached.  And when Zarathustra was quite near them he clearly heard a human voice speaking from out the midst of the cows; and apparently they had all turned their heads towards the speaker.  Then Zarathustra eagerly sprang up the hillock and pulled the animals away, for he feared that here someone had had an accident, which the sympathy of cows could hardly remedy.  But in this he was deceived; for behold, there on the ground sat a man who appeared to be persuading the animals to have no fear of him, a peaceable man and mountain sermonizer out of whose eyes goodness itself preached.  ‘What do you seek here?’ cried Zarathustra in surprise.  ‘What do I seek here?’ he answered: ‘the same as you seek, you peace-breaker! That is, happiness on earth.  ‘To that end, however, I may learn from these cows.  For, let me tell you, I have already been talking to them half a morning and they were just about to reply to me.  Why do you disturb them? ‘If we do not alter and become as cows, we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.  For there is one thing we should learn from them: rumination.  ‘And truly, if a man should gain the whole world and not learn this one thing, rumination: what would it profit him! He would not be free from his affliction, ‘his great affliction: that, however, is today called disgust .  Who today has not his heart, mouth, and eyes filled with disgust? You too! You too! But regard these cows!’ Thus spoke the mountain sermonizer and then turned his glance upon Zarathustra, for up to then it had rested lovingly upon the cows: at that, however, he changed.  ‘Who is that I am speaking with?’ he cried, startled, and jumped up from the ground.  ‘This is the man without disgust, this is Zarathustra himself, the overcomer of the great disgust, this is the eye, this is the mouth, this is the heart of Zarathustra himself.’ And as he spoke thus he kissed the hands of him to whom he spoke with overflowing eyes, and behaved like someone to whom a valuable gift and jewel has unexpectedly fallen from heaven.  The cows, however, looked on and were amazed.  ‘Do not speak of me, you strange, friendly man!’ said Zarathustra, restraining his affection, ‘first speak to me of yourself! Are you not the voluntary beggar who once threw away great riches, ‘ – who was ashamed of his riches and of the rich, and fled to the poor that he might give them his abundance and his heart? But they received him not.’ ‘But they received me not,’ said the voluntary beggar, ‘you know that.  So at last I went to the animals and to these cows.’ ‘Then you learned’, Zarathustra interrupted the speaker, ‘how it is harder to give well than to take well, and that to give well is an art and the ultimate, subtlest master-art of kindness.’ ‘These days especially,’ answered the voluntary beggar: ‘for today everything base has become rebellious and reserved and in its own way haughty: that is, in the mob’s way.  ‘For the hour has come, you know it, for the great, evil, protracted, slow rebellion of the mob and the slaves: it grows and grows! ‘Now all benevolence and petty giving provokes the base; and let the over-rich be on their guard! ‘Whoever today lets drops fall like a big-bellied bottle out of a too-narrow neck – people like to break the necks of such bottles today.  ‘Lustful greed, bitter envy, sour vindictiveness, mob pride: all this threw itself in my face.  It is no longer true that the poor are blessed.  The kingdom of heaven, however, is with the cows.’ ‘And why is it not with the rich?’ asked Zarathustra, tempting him, as he restrained the cows which were sniffing familiarly at the man of peace.  ‘Why do you tempt me?’ answered the latter.  ‘You yourself know better even than I.  For what drove me to the poorest, O Zarathustra? Was it not disgust with our richest? ‘ – disgust with those punished by riches, who glean advantage from all kinds of sweepings, with cold eyes, rank thoughts, disgust with this rabble that stinks to heaven, ‘disgust with this gilded, debased mob whose fathers were pick-pockets or carrion-birds or ragmen with compliant, lustful, forgetful wives – for they are all of them not far from whores – ‘mob above, mob below! What are “poor” and “rich” today! I unlearned this distinction – then I fled away, far away and ever farther, until I came to these cows.’ Thus spoke the man of peace and himself snorted and perspired as he spoke: so that the cows were again amazed.  Zarathustra, however, looked him in the face with a smile all the while he was speaking so sternly, and then silently shook his head.  ‘You do violence to yourself, mountain sermonizer, when you use such stern words.  Neither your mouth nor your eyes were made for such sternness.  ‘Nor your stomach either, as I think: that opposes all such raging and hating and over-frothing.  Your stomach wants gentler things: you are no butcher.  ‘On the contrary, you seem to me a man of plants and roots.  Perhaps you grind corn.  But you are certainly disinclined to fleshy pleasures and love honey.’ ‘You have divined me well,’ answered the voluntary beggar with lightened heart.  ‘I love honey, I also grind corn, for I have sought what tastes well and produces sweet breath: ‘also what takes a long time, a day’s work and a day’s chewing for gentle idlers and sluggards.  ‘To be sure, these cows have attained the greatest proficiency in it: they have devised rumination and lying in the sun.  And they abstain from all heavy thoughts that innate the heart.’ ‘Very well!’ said Zarathustra: ‘you shall see my animals, too, my eagle and my serpent – there is not their like on earth today.  ‘Behold, yonder leads the way to my cave: be its guest tonight.  And speak with my animals of the happiness of animals, ‘until I return home myself.  For now a cry of distress calls me hurriedly away from you.  You will find new honey, too, at my cave, golden honey in the comb, cold as ice: eat it! ‘But now straightway take leave of your cows, you strange, friendly man! although it may be hard for you.  For they are your warmest friends and teachers!’ ‘Except one, whom I love more,’ answered the voluntary beggar.  ‘You yourself are good, and even better than a cow, O Zarathustra!’ ‘Away, away with you! you arrant flatterer!’ cried Zarathustra mischievously, ‘why do you spoil me with such praise and honey of flattery?’ ‘Away, away from me!’ he cried again and swung his stick at the affectionate beggar; he, however, ran nimbly away.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Chastity I LOVE the forest.  It is bad to live in towns: too many of the lustful live there.  Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer than into the dreams of a lustful woman? And just look at these men: their eye reveals it – they know of nothing better on earth than to lie with a woman.  There is filth at the bottom of their souls; and it is worse if this filth still has something of the spirit in it! If only you had become perfect at least as animals! But to animals belongs innocence.  Do I exhort you to kill your senses? I exhort you to an innocence of the senses.  Do I exhort you to chastity? With some, chastity is a virtue, but with many it is almost a vice.  These people abstain, it is true: but the bitch Sensuality glares enviously out of all they do.  This restless beast follows them even into the heights of their virtue and the depths of their cold spirit.  And how nicely the bitch Sensuality knows how to beg for a piece of spirit, when a piece of flesh is denied her.  Do you love tragedies and all that is heartbreaking? But I mistrust your bitch Sensuality.  Your eyes are too cruel for me; you look upon sufferers lustfully.  Has your lasciviousness not merely disguised itself and called itself pity? And I offer you this parable: Not a few who sought to drive out their devil entered into the swine themselves.  Those to whom chastity is difficult should be dissuaded from it, lest it become the way to Hell – that is, to filth and lust of the soul.  Am I speaking of dirty things? That does not seem to me the worst I could do.  Not when truth is dirty, but when it is shallow, does the enlightened man dislike to wade into its waters.  Truly, there are those who are chaste from the very heart: they are more gentle of heart and they laugh more often and more heartily than you.  They laugh at chastity too, and ask: ‘What is chastity? ‘Is chastity not folly? But this folly came to us and not we to it.  ‘We offered this guest love and shelter: now it lives with us – let it stay as long as it wishes!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Passing By THUS , slowly making his way among many people and through divers towns, did Zarathustra return indirectly to his mountain and his cave.  And behold, on his way he came unawares to the gate of the great city; here, however, a frothing fool with hands outstretched sprang at him and blocked his path.  But this was the fool the people called ‘Zarathustra’s ape’: for he had learned from him something of the composition and syntax of language and perhaps also liked to borrow from his store of wisdom.  The fool, however, spoke thus to Zarathustra: O Zarathustra, here is the great city: here you have nothing to seek and everything to lose.  Why do you want to wade through this mud? Take pity on your feet! Rather spit upon the gate and – turn back! Here is the Hell for hermits’ thoughts: here great thoughts are boiled alive and cooked small.  Here all great emotions decay: here only little, dry emotions may rattle! Do you not smell already the slaughter-houses and cook-shops of the spirit? Does this city not reek of the fumes of slaughtered spirit? Do you not see the souls hanging like dirty, limp rags? – And they also make newspapers from these rags! Have you not heard how the spirit has here become a play with words? It vomits out repulsive verbal swill! – And they also make newspapers from this verbal swill.  They pursue one another and do not know where.  They inflame one another, and do not know why.  They rattle their tins, they jingle their gold.  They are cold and seek warmth in distilled waters; they are inflamed and seek coolness in frozen spirits; they are all ill and diseased with public opinion.  All lusts and vices are at home here; but there are virtuous people here, too, there are many adroit, useful virtues: Many adroit virtues with scribbling fingers and behinds hardened to sitting and waiting, blessed with little chest decorations and padded, rumpless daughters.  There is also much piety here and much devout spittle-licking and fawning before the God of Hosts.  Down ‘from on high’ drips the star and the gracious spittle; every starless breast longs to go up ‘on high’.  The moon has its court, and the court has its mooncalves: to all that comes from the court, however, do the paupers and all the adroit pauper-virtues pray.  ‘I serve, you serve, we serve’ – thus does all adroit virtue pray to the prince: so that the merited star may at last be fastened to the narrow breast.  But the moon still revolves around all that is earthly: so the prince, too, still revolves around what is most earthly of all: that, however, is the shopkeepers’ gold.  The God of Hosts is not the god of the golden ingots; the prince proposes, but the shopkeeper – disposes! By all that is luminous and strong and good in you, O Zarathustra! spit upon this city of shopkeepers and turn back! Here all blood flows foul and tepid and frothy through all veins: spit upon the great city that is the great rubbish pile where all the scum froths together! Spit upon the city of flattened souls and narrow breasts, of slant eyes and sticky fingers – upon the city of die importunate, the shameless, the ranters in writing and speech, the overheated ambitious: where everything rotten, disreputable, lustful, gloomy, overripe, ulcerous, conspiratorial festers together – spit upon the great city and turn back! But here Zarathustra interrupted the frothing fool and stopped his mouth.  Have done! (cried Zarathustra) Your speech and your kind have long disgusted me! Why did you live so long in the swamp that you had to become a frog and toad yourself? Does not foul, foaming swamp-blood now flow through your own veins, so that you have learned to quack and rail like this? Why did you not go into the forest? Or plough the earth? Is the sea not full of green islands? I despise your contempt; and since you warned me, why did you not warn yourself? My contempt and my bird of warning shall ascend from love alone; not from the swamp! They call you my ape, you frothing fool: but I call you my grunting pig – by grunting you are undoing even my praise of folly.  What, then, was it that started you grunting? That nobody had flattered you enough: therefore you sat down beside this filth, so that you might have cause for much grunting – so that you might have cause for much revenge ! For all your frothing, you vain fool, is revenge; I have divined you well! But your foolish teaching is harmful to me , even when you are right I And if Zarathustra’s teaching were a hundred times justified, you would still – use my teaching falsely! Thus spoke Zarathustra; and he looked at the great city, sighed and was long silent.  At length he spoke thus: This great city, and not only this fool, disgusts me.  In both there is nothing to make better, nothing to make worse.  Woe to this great city! And I wish I could see already the pillar of fire in which it will be consumed! For such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide.  Yet this has its time and its own destiny.  But I offer you in farewell this precept, you fool: Where one can no longer love, one should – pass by ! Thus spoke Zarathustra and passed by the fool and the great city.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of War and Warriors W E do not wish to be spared by our best enemies, nor by those whom we love from the very heart.  So let me tell you the truth! My brothers in war! I love you from the very heart, I am and have always been of your kind.  And I am also your best enemy.  So let me tell you the truth! I know the hatred and envy of your hearts.  You are not great enough not to know hatred and envy.  So be great enough not to be ashamed of them! And if you cannot be saints of knowledge, at least be its warriors.  They are the companions and forerunners of such sainthood.  I see many soldiers: if only I could see many warriors! What they wear is called uniform: may what they conceal with it not be uniform too! You should be such men as are always looking for an enemy – for your enemy.  And with some of you there is hate at first sight.  You should seek your enemy, you should wage your war – a war for your opinions.  And if your opinion is defeated, your honesty should still cry triumph over that! You should love peace as a means to new wars.  And the short peace more than the long.  I do not exhort you to work but to battle.  I do not exhort you to peace, but to victory.  May your work be a battle, may your peace be a victory! One can be silent and sit still only when one has arrow and bow: otherwise one babbles and quarrels.  May your peace be a victory! You say it is the good cause that hallows even war? I tell you: it is the good war that hallows every cause.  War and courage have done more great things than charity.  Not your pity but your bravery has saved the unfortunate up to now.  ‘What is good?’ you ask.  To be brave is good.  Let the little girls say: ‘To be good is to be what is pretty and at the same time touching.’ They call you heartless: but your heart is true, and I love the modesty of your kind-heartedness.  You feel ashamed of your flow, while others feel ashamed of their ebb.  Are you ugly? Very well, my brothers! Take the sublime about you, the mantle of the ugly! And when your soul grows great, it grows arrogant, and there is wickedness in your sublimity.  I know you.  In wickedness, the arrogant and the weak man meet.  But they misunderstand one another.  I know you.  You may have enemies whom you hate, but not enemies whom you despise.  You must be proud of your enemy: then the success of your enemy shall be your success too.  To rebel – that shows nobility in a slave.  Let your nobility show itself in obeying! Let even your commanding be an obeying! To a good warrior, ‘thou shalt’ sounds more agreeable than ‘I will’.  And everything that is dear to you, you should first have commanded to you.  Let your love towards life be love towards your highest hope: and let your highest hope be the highest idea of life! But you should let me commend to you your highest idea -and it is: Man is something that should be overcome.  Thus live your life of obedience and war! What good is long life? What warrior wants to be spared? I do not spare you, I love you from the very heart, my brothers in war! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Priests A ND one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples and spoke these words to them: Here are priests: and although they are my enemies, pass them by quietly and with sleeping swords! There are heroes even among them; many of them have suffered too much: so they want to make others suffer.  They are bad enemies: nothing is more revengeful than their humility.  And he who touches them is easily defiled.  But my blood is related to theirs; and I want to know my blood honoured even in theirs.  And when they had passed by, Zarathustra was assailed by a pain; and he had not struggled long with his pain when he began to speak thus: I pity these priests.  They go against my taste, too; but that means little to me since I am among men.  But I suffer and have suffered with them: they seem to me prisoners and marked men.  He whom they call Redeemer has cast them into bondage - Into the bondage of false values and false scriptures! Ah, that someone would redeem them from their Redeemer! Once, as the sea tossed them about, they thought they had landed upon an island; but behold, it was a sleeping monster! False values and false scriptures: they are the worst monsters for mortal men – fate sleeps and waits long within them.  But at last it comes and awakes and eats and devours all that have built their huts upon it.  Oh, just look at these huts that these priests have built themselves.  Churches they call their sweet-smelling caves! Oh this counterfeit light! oh this musty air I here, where the soul may not fly up to its height! On the contrary, their faith commands: ‘Up the steps on your knees, you sinners!’ Truly, I would rather see men still shameless than with the distorted eyes of their shame and devotion! Who created such caves and penitential steps? Was it not those who wanted to hide themselves and were ashamed before the clear sky? And only when the clear sky again looks through broken roofs and down upon grass and red poppies on broken walls – only then will I turn my heart again towards the places of this God.  They called God that which contradicted and harmed them: and truly, there was much that was heroic in their worship! And they knew no other way of loving their God than by nailing men to the Cross! They thought to live as corpses, they dressed their corpses in black; even in their speech I still smell the evil aroma of burial vaults.  And he who lives in their neighbourhood lives in the neighbourhood of black pools, from out of which the toad, that prophet of evil, sings its song with sweet melancholy.  They would have to sing better songs to make me believe in their Redeemer: his disciples would have to look more redeemed! I should like to see them naked: for beauty alone should preach penitence.  But whom could this disguised affliction persuade! Truly, their Redeemers themselves did not come from freedom and the seventh heaven of freedom! Truly, they themselves never trod upon the carpets of knowledge! The spirit of their Redeemers consisted of holes; but into every hole they had put their illusion, their stop-gap, which they called God.  Their spirit was drowned in their pity, and when they swelled and overswelled with pity a great folly always swam to the top.  Zealously and with clamour they drove their herds over their bridge: as if there were only one bridge to the future! Truly, these shepherds, too, still belonged among the sheep! These shepherds had small intellects and spacious souls: but, my brothers, what small countries have even the most spacious souls been, up to now! They wrote letters of blood on the path they followed, and their folly taught that truth is proved by blood.  But blood is the worst witness of truth; blood poisons and transforms the purest teaching to delusion and hatred of the heart.  And if someone goes through fire for his teaching – what does that prove? Truly, it is more when one’s own teaching comes out of one’s own burning! Sultry heart and cold head: where these meet there arises the blusterer, the ‘Redeemer’.  Truly, there have been greater men and higher-born ones than those whom the people call Redeemer, those ravishing and overpowering blustering winds! And you, my brothers, must be redeemed by greater men than any Redeemer has been, if you would find the way to freedom! There has never yet been a Superman.  I have seen them both naked, the greatest and the smallest man.  They are still all-too-similar to one another.  Truly, I found even the greatest man – all-too-human! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Spirit of Gravity 1 M Y glib tongue – is of the people; I speak too coarsely and warmly for silky rabbits.  And my words sound even stranger to all inky fish and scribbling foxes.  My hand – is a fool’s hand: woe to all tables and walls and whatever has room left for fool’s scribbling, fool’s doodling! My foot – is a horse’s foot: with it I trot and trample up hill, down dale, hither and thither over the fields, and am the Devil’s own for joy when I am out at a gallop.  My stomach – is it perhaps an eagle’s stomach? For it likes lamb’s flesh best of all.  But it is certainly a bird’s stomach.  Nourished with innocent and few things, ready and impatient to fly, to fly away – that is my nature now: how should there not be something of the bird’s nature in it! And especially bird-like is that I am enemy to the Spirit of Gravity: and truly, mortal enemy, arch-enemy, born enemy! Oh where has my enmity not flown and strayed already! I could sing a song about that – and I will sing one, although I am alone in an empty house and have to sing it to my own ears.  There are other singers, to be sure, whose voices are softened, whose hands are eloquent, whose eyes are expressive, whose hearts are awakened, only when the house is full: I am not one of them.  2 He who will one day teach men to fly will have moved all boundary-stones; all boundary-stones will themselves fly into the air to him, he will baptize the earth anew – as ‘the weightless’.  The ostrich runs faster than any horse, but even he sticks his head heavily into heavy earth: that is what the man who cannot yet fly is like.  He calls earth and life heavy: and so will the Spirit of Gravity have it! But he who wants to become light and a bird must love himself – thus do I teach.  Not with the love of the sick and diseased, to be sure: for with them even self-love stinks! One must learn to love oneself with a sound and healthy love, so that one may endure it with oneself and not go roaming about – thus do I teach.  Such roaming about calls itself ‘love of one’s neighbour’: these words have been up to now the best for lying and dissembling, and especially for those who were oppressive to everybody.  And truly, to learn to love oneself is no commandment for today or for tomorrow.  Rather is this art the finest, subtlest, ultimate, and most patient of all.  For all his possessions are well concealed from the possessor; and of all treasure pits, one’s own is the last to be digged – the Spirit of Gravity is the cause of that.  Almost in the cradle are we presented with heavy words and values: this dowry calls itself’ Good’ and ‘Evil’.  For its sake we are forgiven for being alive.  And we suffer little children to come to us, to prevent them in good time from loving themselves: the Spirit of Gravity is the cause of that.  And we – we bear loyally what we have been given upon hard shoulders over rugged mountains! And when we sweat we are told: ‘Yes, life is hard to bear!’ But only man is hard to bear! That is because he bears too many foreign things upon his shoulders.  Like the camel, he kneels down and lets himself be well laden.  Especially the strong, weight-bearing man in whom dwell respect and awe: he has laden too many foreign heavy words and values upon himself – now life seems to him a desert! And truly I Many things that are one’s own are hard to bear, too! And much that is intrinsic in man is like the oyster, that is loathsome and slippery and hard to grasp – so that a noble shell with noble embellishments must intercede for it.  But one has to learn this art as well: to have a shell and a fair appearance and a prudent blindness! Again, it is deceptive about many things in man that many a shell is inferior and wretched and too much of a shell.  Much hidden goodness and power is never guessed at; the most exquisite dainties find no tasters! Women, or the most exquisite of them, know this: a little fatter, a little thinner – oh, how much fate lies in so little! Man is difficult to discover, most of all to himself; the spirit often tells lies about the soul.  The Spirit of Gravity is the cause of that.  But he has discovered himself who says: This is my good and evil: he has silenced thereby the mole and dwarf who says: ‘Good for all, evil for all.’ Truly, I dislike also those who call everything good and this world the best of all.  I call such people the all-contented.  All-contentedness that knows how to taste everything: that is not the best taste! I honour the obstinate, fastidious tongues and stomachs that have learned to say ‘I’ and ‘Yes’ and ‘No’.  But to chew and digest everything – that is to have a really swinish nature! Always to say Ye-a 32 – only the ass and those like him have learned that.  Deep yellow and burning red: that is to my taste – it mixes blood with all colours.  But he who whitewashes his house betrays to me a whitewashed soul.  One loves mummies, the other phantoms; and both alike enemy to all flesh and blood – oh, how both offend my taste! For I love blood.  And I do not want to stay and dwell where everyone spews and spits: that is now my taste – I would rather live among thieves and perjurers.  No one bears gold in his mouth.  More offensive to me, however, are all lickspittles; and the most offensive beast of a man I ever found I baptized Parasite: it would not love, yet wanted to live by love.  I call wretched all who have only one choice: to become an evil beast or an evil tamer of beasts: I would build no tabernacles among these men.  I also call wretched those who always have to wait – they offend my taste: all tax-collectors and shopkeepers and kings and other keepers of lands and shops.  Truly, I too have learned to wait, I have learned it from the very heart, but only to wait for myself .  And above all I have learned to stand and to walk and to run and to jump and to climb and to dance.  This, however, is my teaching: He who wants to learn to fly one day must first learn to stand and to walk and to run and to climb and to dance – you cannot learn to fly by flying! With rope-ladders I learned to climb to many a window, with agile legs I climbed up high masts: to sit upon high masts of knowledge seemed to me no small happiness – to flicker like little flames upon high masts: a little light, to be sure, but yet a great comfort to castaway sailors and the shipwrecked! I came to my truth by diverse paths and in diverse ways: it was not upon a single ladder that I climbed to the height where my eyes survey my distances.  And I have asked the way only unwillingly – that has always offended my taste! I have rather questioned and attempted the ways themselves.  All my progress has been an attempting and a questioning – and truly, one has to learn how to answer such questioning! That however – is to my taste: not good taste, not bad taste, but my taste, which I no longer conceal and of which I am no longer ashamed.  ‘This – is now my way: where is yours?’ Thus I answered those who asked me ‘the way’.  For the way – does not exist! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Ugliest Man A ND again Zarathustra’s feet ran through forests and mountains, and his eyes sought and sought, but him they desired to see, the great sufferer and crier of distress, was nowhere to be seen.  All the time he was on his way, however, he rejoiced in his heart and was thankful.  ‘What good things this day has given me,’ he said, ‘as recompense for having begun so badly! What strange discoursers I have found! ‘Now I will long chew their words as if they were fine corn; my teeth shall grind and crunch them small, until they flow into my soul like milk!’ But when the path again rounded a rock, all at once the scenery changed, and Zarathustra stepped into a kingdom of death.  Here black and red cliffs projected up: no grass, no tree, no cry of birds.  For it was a valley which all beasts avoided, even the beasts of prey; except that a kind of ugly, thick, green serpent, when it grew old, came here to die.  Therefore the shepherds called this valley ‘Serpent’s Death’.  Zarathustra, however, was plunged into dark recollections, for it seemed to him as if he had stood in this valley once before.  And many heavy things settled upon his mind: so that he went slowly and ever slower and at last stopped.  Then, however, as he opened his eyes, he saw something sitting on the pathway, shaped like a man and yet hardly like a man, something unutterable.  And all at once Zarathustra was overcome by the great shame of having beheld such a thing: blushing to his white hair, he turned his glance away and lifted his foot to leave this evil spot.  But then the dead wilderness resounded: for from the ground issued a gurgling, rasping sound such as water makes in stopped-up water-pipes at night; and at last a human voice and human speech emerged from it: it sounded thus: ‘Zarathustra! Zarathustra! Read my riddle! Speak, speak! What is the revenge on the witness? ‘I entice you back, here is slippery ice! Take care, take care that your pride does not here break its legs! ‘You think yourself wise, proud Zarathustra! So read the riddle, you hard nut-cracker – the riddle that I am! So speak: who am I?’ But when Zarathustra had heard these words, what do you think then happened to his soul? Pity overcame him ; and all at once he sank down, like an oak tree that has long withstood many woodchoppers, heavily, suddenly, to the terror even of those who wanted to fell it.  But at once he arose from the ground and his countenance grew stern.  ‘I know you well,’ he said in a brazen voice: ‘you are the murderer of God ! Let me go.  ‘You could not endure him who saw you – who saw you unblinking and through and through, you ugliest man! You took revenge upon this witness!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and made to depart; but the unutterable creature grasped for a corner of his garment and began again to gurgle and grope for speech.  ‘Stay!’ he said at last, ‘stay! Do not go by! I have divined what axe it was that struck you to earth: Hail to you, O Zarathustra, that you are standing again! ‘You have divined, I know it well, how he feels who killed God – how the murderer of God feels.  Stay I Sit beside me; it is not to no purpose.  ‘To whom did I intend to go if not to you? Stay, sit down! But do not look at me! Honour thus – my ugliness! ‘They persecute me: now you are my last refuge.  Not with their hatred, not with their henchmen – oh, I would mock such persecution, I would be proud and glad of it! ‘Has not all success hitherto been with the well-persecuted? And he who persecutes well easily learns to follow 45 – for he is already – at the heels of others.  But it is their pity , ‘it is their pity from which I flee and flee to you.  O Zarathustra, my last refuge, protect me; you, the only one who can divine me: ‘you have divined how he feels who has killed him .  Stay! And if you will go, impatient man, do not go the way I came.  That way is bad.  ‘Are you angry with me because I have mangled language too long? Because I have advised you? But know: it is I, the ugliest man, ‘who also have the biggest, heaviest feet.  Where I have gone, the way is bad.  I tread all roads to death and to destruction.  ‘But that you went past me, silent; that you blushed, I saw it well: by that I knew you for Zarathustra.  ‘Anyone else would have thrown me his alms, his pity, in glance and speech.  But for that – I am not enough of a beggar, you have divined that – ‘for that I am too rich , rich in big things, in fearsome things, in the ugliest things, in the most unutterable things! Your shame, O Zarathustra, honoured me! ‘I escaped with difficulty from the importunate crowd of those who pity, that I might find the only one who today teaches “Pity is importunate” – you, O Zarathustra! ‘ – be it the pity of a god, be it human pity: pity is contrary to modesty.  And unwillingness to help may be nobler than that virtue which comes running with help.  ‘That however, pity, is called virtue itself with all little people – they lack reverence for great misfortune, great ugliness, great failure.  ‘I look beyond all these, as a dog looks over the backs of swarming flocks of sheep.  They are little, well-meaning, well-woolled, colourless people.  ‘As a heron looks contemptuously over shallow ponds, with head thrown back: so do I look over the swarm of colourless little waves and wills and souls.  ‘Too long have they been allowed right, these little people: thus at last they have been allowed power, too – now they teach: “Only that is good which little people call good.” ‘And “truth” today is what the preacher said who himself sprang from them, that strange saint and advocate of the little people who testified of himself “I – am the truth”.  ‘This immodest man has long made the cock’s comb of the little people rise up in pride – he who taught no small error when he taught “I – am the truth”.  ‘Was an immodest man ever answered more politely? But you, O Zarathustra, passed him by and said: “No! No! Thrice No!” ‘You warned against his error, as the first to do so, you warned against pity – no one else, only you and those of your kind.  ‘You are ashamed of the shame of the great sufferer; and truly, when you say “A great cloud emerges from pity, take care mankind!” ‘When you teach “All creators are hard, all great love is beyond pity”: O Zarathustra, how well-read in weather-omens you seem to me! ‘You yourself, however – warn yourself too against your pity! For many are on their way to you, many suffering, doubting, despairing, drowning, freezing people – ‘I warn you too against myself.  You have read my best, my worst riddle, me myself, and what I have done.  I know the axe that fells you.  ‘But he – had to die: he looked with eyes that saw everything – he saw the depths and abysses of man, all man’s hidden disgrace and ugliness.  ‘His pity knew no shame: he crept into my dirtiest corners.  This most curious, most over-importunate, over-compassionate god had to die.  ‘He always saw me : I desired to take revenge on such a witness – or cease to live myself.  ‘The god who saw everything, even man : this god had to die! Man could not endure that such a witness should live.’ Thus spoke the ugliest man.  Zarathustra, however, rose and prepared to go: for he was chilled to his very marrow.  ‘You unutterable creature,’ he said, ‘you warned me against your road.  As thanks for that, I recommend you mine.  Behold, up yonder lies Zarathustra’s cave.  ‘My cave is big and deep and possesses many corners; there the best hidden man can find his hiding place.  And close by it are a hundred secret and slippery ways for creeping, fluttering, and jumping beasts.  ‘You outcast who cast yourself out, do you not wish to live among men and the pity of men? Very well, do as I do.  Thus you will also learn from me; only the doer learns.  ‘And first of all and above all speak with my animals! The proudest animal and the wisest animal – they may well be the proper counsellors for both of us!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and went his way, even more thoughtfully and slowly than before: for he asked himself many things and did not easily know what to answer.  How poor is man! (he thought in his heart) how ugly, how croaking, how full of secret shame! They tell me that man loves himself: ah, how great must this self-love be! How much contempt is opposed to it! Even this man has loved himself as he has despised himself – he seems to me a great lover and a great despiser.  I have yet found no one who has despised himself more deeply: even that is height.  Alas, was he perhaps the Higher Man whose cry I heard? I love the great despisers.  Man, however, is something that must be overcome.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Friend ‘O NE is always one too many around me’ – thus speaks the hermit.  ‘Always once one – in the long run that makes two!’ I and Me are always too earnestly in conversation with one another: how could it be endured, if there were not a friend? For the hermit the friend is always the third person: the third person is the cork that prevents the conversation of the other two from sinking to the depths.  Alas, for all hermits there are too many depths.  That is why they long so much for a friend and for his heights.  Our faith in others betrays wherein we would dearly like to have faith in ourselves.  Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.  And often with our love we only want to leap over envy.  And often we attack and make an enemy in order to conceal that we are vulnerable to attack.  ‘At least be my enemy!’ – thus speaks the true reverence, that does not venture to ask for friendship.  If you want a friend, you must also be willing to wage war for him: and to wage war, you must be capable of being an enemy.  You should honour even the enemy in your friend.  Can you go near to your friend without going over to him? In your friend you should possess your best enemy.  Your heart should feel closest to him when you oppose him.  Do you wish to go naked before your friend? Is it in honour of your friend that you show yourself to him as you are? But he wishes you to the Devil for it! He who makes no secret of himself excites anger in others: that is how much reason you have to fear nakedness! If you were gods you could then be ashamed of your clothes! You cannot adorn yourself too well for your friend: for you should be to him an arrow and a longing for the Superman.  Have you ever watched your friend asleep – to discover what he looked like? Yet your friend’s face is something else beside.  It is your own face, in a rough and imperfect mirror.  Have you ever watched your friend asleep? Were you not startled to see what he looked like? O my friend, man is something that must be overcome.  The friend should be a master in conjecture and in keeping silence: you must not want to see everything.  Your dream should tell you what your friend does when awake.  May your pity be a conjecture: that you may first know if your friend wants pity.  Perhaps what he loves in you is the undimmed eye and the glance of eternity.  Let your pity for your friend conceal itself under a hard shell; you should break a tooth biting upon it.  Thus it will have delicacy and sweetness.  Are you pure air and solitude and bread and medicine to your friend? Many a one cannot deliver himself from his own chains and yet he is his friend’s deliverer.  Are you a slave? If so, you cannot be a friend.  Are you a tyrant? If so, you cannot have friends.  In woman, a slave and a tyrant have all too long been concealed.  For that reason, woman is not yet capable of friendship: she knows only love.  In a woman’s love is injustice and blindness towards all that she does not love.  And in the enlightened love of a woman, too, there is still the unexpected attack and lightning and night, along with the light.  Woman is not yet capable of friendship: women ate still cats and birds.  Or, at best, cows.  Woman is not yet capable of friendship.  But tell me, you men, which of you is yet capable of friendship? Oh your poverty, you men, and your avarice of soul! As much as you give to your friend I will give even to my enemy, and will not have grown poorer in doing so.  There is comradeship: may there be friendship! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Involuntary Bliss W ITH such riddles and bitterness in his heart did Zarathustra fare across the sea.  When he was four days’ journey from the Blissful Islands and from his friends, however, he had overcome all his pain – triumphantly and with firm feet he again accepted his destiny.  26 And then Zarathustra spoke thus to his rejoicing conscience: I am again alone and willingly so, alone with the pure sky and the open sea; and again it is afternoon around me.  It was afternoon when I once found my friends for the first time, it was afternoon, too, when I found them a second time – at the hour when all light grows stiller.  For whatever happiness that is still travelling between heaven and earth now seeks shelter in a luminous soul: with happiness all light has now grown stiller.  O afternoon of my life! Once my happiness, too, climbed down into the valley to seek a shelter: there it found these open, hospitable souls.  O afternoon of my life! What have I not given away that I might possess one thing: this living plantation of my thoughts and this dawn of my highest hope! Once the creator sought companions and children of his hope: and behold, it turned out that he could not find them, except he first create them himself.  Thus I am in the midst of my work, going to my children and turning from them: for the sake of his children must Zarathustra perfect himself.  For one loves from the very heart only one’s child and one’s work; and where there is great love of oneself, then it is a sign of pregnancy: thus have I found.  My children are still green in their first spring, standing close together and shaken in common by the winds, the trees of my garden and my best soil.  And truly! Where such trees stand together, there blissful islands are ! But one day I will uproot them and set each one up by itself, that it may learn solitude and defiance and foresight.  Then it shall stand by the sea, gnarled and twisted and with supple hardiness, a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.  Yonder, where storms plunge down into the sea and the mountain’s snout drinks water, there each of them shall one day keep its day and night watch, for its testing and recogniton.  It shall be tested and recognized, to see whether it is of my kind and my race – whether it is master of a protracted will, silent even when it speaks, and giving in such a way that in giving it takes – that it may one day be my companion and a fellow-creator and fellow-rejoicer of Zarathustra – such a one as inscribes my will upon my tablets: for the greater perfection of all things.  And for its sake, and for those like it, must I perfect myself : therefore I now avoid my happiness and offer myself to all unhappiness – for my ultimate testing and recognition.  And truly, it was time I went; and the wanderer’s shadow and the longest sojourn and the stillest hour – all told me: ‘It is high time!’ The wind blew to me through the keyhole and said: ‘Come!’ The door sprang cunningly open and said: ‘Go!’ But I lay fettered to love of my children: desire set this snare for me, desire for love, that I might become my children’s victim and lose myself through them.  To desire – that now means to me: to have lost myself.  I possess you, my children! In this possession all should be certainty and nothing desire.  But the sun of my love lay brooding upon me, Zarathustra stewed in his own juice – then shadows and doubts flew past me.  I hankered after frost and winter: ‘Oh that frost and winter would again make me crackle and crunch!’ I sighed: then icy mist arose from me.  My past broke open its graves, many a pain buried alive awoke: they had only been sleeping, concealed in winding sheets.  Thus in symbols everything called to me: ‘It is time!’ But I – did not hear: until at last my abyss stirred and my thought bit me.  Alas, abysmal thought that is my thought! When shall I find the strength to hear you boring and no longer tremble? My heart rises to my throat when I hear you boring I Even your silence threatens to choke me, you abysmal, silent thought! I have never yet dared to summon you up : it has been enough that I – carried you with me! I have not yet been strong enough for the ultimate lion’s arrogance and lion’s wantonness.  Your heaviness has always been fearful enough for me: but one day I shall find the strength and the lion’s voice to summon you up! When I have overcome myself in that, I will overcome myself in that which is greater; and a victory shall be the seal of my perfection! In the meantime, I travel on uncertain seas; smooth-tongued chance flatters me; I gaze forward and backward, still I see no end.  The hour of my last struggle has not yet arrived – or has it perhaps just arrived? Truly, sea and life around me gaze at me with insidious beauty! O afternoon of my life! O happiness before evening! O harbour in mid-sea! O peace in uncertainty! How I mistrust you all! Truly, I am mistrustful of your insidious beauty! I am like the lover who mistrusts all-too-velvety smiles.  As the jealous man thrusts his best beloved from him, tender even in his hardness – thus do I thrust this blissful hour from me.  Away with you, blissful hour! With you there came to me an involuntary bliss!1 stand here ready for my deepest pain – you came out of season! Away with you, blissful hour! Rather take shelter yonder – with my children! Hurry, and bless them before evening with my happiness! There evening already approaches: the sun is sinking.  Away – my happiness! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  And he waited all night for his unhappiness: but he waited in vain.  The night remained clear and still and happiness itself drew nearer and nearer to him.  Towards morning, however, Zarathustra laughed to his heart and said ironically: ‘Happiness runs after me.  That is because I do not run after women.  Happiness, however, is a woman.’ Thus Spoke Zarathustra Thus Spoke Zarathustra A BOOK FOR EVERYONE AND NO ONE TRANSLATED WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY R.  J.  Hollingdale PENGUIN BOOKS Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Pale Criminal Y OU do not intend to kill, you judges and sacrificers, before the beast has bowed its neck? Behold, the pale criminal has bowed his neck: from his eye speaks the great contempt.  ‘My Ego is something that should be overcome: my Ego is to me the great contempt of man’: that is what this eye says.  He judged himself – that was his supreme moment: do not let the exalted man relapse again into his lowly condition! There is no redemption for him who thus suffers from himself, except it be a quick death.  Your killing, you judges, should be a mercy and not a revenge.  And since you kill, see to it that you yourselves justify life! It is not sufficient that you should be reconciled with him you kill.  May your sorrow be love for the Superman: thus will you justify your continuing to live! You should say ‘enemy’, but not ‘miscreant’; you should say ‘invalid’, but not ‘scoundrel’; you should say ‘fool’, but not ‘sinner’.  And you, scarlet judge, if you would speak aloud all you have done in thought, everyone would cry: ‘Away with this filth and poisonous snake!’ But the thought is one thing, the deed is another, and another yet is the image of the deed.  The wheel of causality does not roll between them.  An image made this pale man pale.  He was equal to his deed when he did it: but he could not endure its image after it was done.  Now for evermore he saw himself as the perpetrator of one deed.  I call this madness: in him the exception has become the rule.  The chalk-line charmed the hen; the blow he struck charmed his simple mind – I call this madness after the deed.  Listen, you judges! There is another madness as well; and it comes before the deed.  Ah, you have not crept deep enough into this soul! Thus says the scarlet judge: ‘Why did this criminal murder? He wanted to steal.’ But I tell you: his soul wanted blood not booty: he thirsted for the joy of the knife! But his simple mind did not understand this madness and it persuaded him otherwise.  ‘What is the good of blood?’ it said.  ‘Will you not at least commit a theft too? Take a revenge?’ And he hearkened to his simple mind: its words lay like lead upon him – then he robbed as he murdered.  He did not want to be ashamed of his madness.  And now again the lead of his guilt lies upon him, and again his simple mind is so numb, so paralysed, so heavy.  If only he could shake his head his burden would roll off: but who can shake this head? What is this man? A heap of diseases that reach out into the world through the spirit: there they want to catch their prey.  What is this man? A knot of savage serpents that are seldom at peace among themselves – thus they go forth alone to seek prey in the world.  Behold this poor body! This poor soul interpreted to itself what this body suffered and desired – it interpreted it as lust for murder and greed for the joy of the knife.  The evil which is now evil overtakes him who now becomes sick: he wants to do harm with that which harms him.  But there have been other ages and another evil and good.  Once doubt and the will to Self were evil.  Then the invalid became heretic and witch: as heretic and witch he suffered and wanted to cause suffering.  But this will not enter your ears: you tell me it hurts your good people.  But what are your good people to me? Much about your good people moves me to disgust, and it is not their evil I mean.  How I wish they possessed a madness through which they could perish, like this pale criminal.  Truly, I wish their madness were called truth or loyalty or justice: but they possess their virtue in order to live long and in a miserable ease.  I am a railing beside the stream: he who can grasp me, let him grasp me! I am not, however, your crutch.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Sublime Men S TILL is the bottom of my sea: who could guess that it hides sportive monsters! Imperturbable is my depth: but it glitters with swimming riddles and laughter.  Today I saw a sublime man, a solemn man, a penitent of the spirit: oh, how my soul laughed at his ugliness! With upraised breast and in the attitude of a man drawing in breath: thus he stood there, the sublime man, and silent.  Hung with ugly truths, the booty of his hunt, and rich in torn clothes; many thorns, too, hung on him – but I saw no rose.  As yet he has not learned of laughter and beauty.  This huntsman returned gloomily from the forest of knowledge.  He returned home from the fight with wild beasts: but a wild beast still gazes out of his seriousness – a beast that has not been overcome! He stands there like a tiger about to spring; but I do not like these tense souls, my taste is hostile towards all these withdrawn men.  And do you tell me, friends, that there is no dispute over taste and tasting? But all life is dispute over taste and tasting! Taste: that is at the same time weight and scales and weigher; and woe to all living creatures that want to live without dispute over weight and scales and weigher! If he grew weary of his sublimity, this sublime man, only then would his beauty rise up – and only then will I taste him and find him tasty.  And only if he turns away from himself will he jump over his own shadow – and jump, in truth, into bis own sunlight.  He has sat all too long in the shadows, the cheeks of the penitent of the spirit have grown pale; he has almost starved on his expectations.  There is still contempt in his eye, and disgust lurks around his mouth.  He rests now, to be sure, but he has never yet lain down in the sunlight.  He should behave like the ox; and his happiness should smell of the earth and not of contempt for the earth.  I should like to see him as a white ox, snorting and bellowing as he goes before the plough: and his bellowing, too, should laud all earthly things! His countenance is still dark; his hand’s shadow plays upon it.  The sense of his eyes, too, is overshadowed.  His deed itself is still the shadow upon him: the hand darkens the doer.  18 He has still not overcome his deed.  To be sure, I love in him the neck of the ox: but now I want to see the eye of the angel, too.  He must unlearn his heroic will, too: he should be an exalted man and not only a sublime one – the ether itself should raise him up, the will-less one! He has tamed monsters, he has solved riddles: but he should also redeem his monsters and riddles, he should transform them into heavenly children.  His knowledge has not yet learned to smile and to be without jealousy; his gushing passion has not yet grown calm in beauty.  Truly, his longing should be silenced and immersed not in satiety but in beauty! The generosity of the magnanimous man should include gracefulness.  With his arm laid across his head: that is how the hero should rest, that is also how he should overcome his rest.  But it is precisely to the hero that beauty is the most difficult of all things.  Beauty is unattainable to all violent wills.  A little more, a little less: precisely that is much here, here that is the most of all.  To stand with relaxed muscles and unharnessed wills: that is the most difficult thing for all of you, you sublime men! When power grows gracious and descends into the visible: I call such descending beauty.  And I desire beauty from no one as much as I desire it from you, you man of power: may your goodness be your ultimate self-overpowering.  I believe you capable of any evil: therefore I desire of you the good.  In truth, I have often laughed at the weaklings who think themselves good because their claws are blunt! You should aspire to the virtue of the pillar: the higher it rises, the fairer and more graceful it grows, but inwardly harder and able to bear more weight.  Yes, you sublime man, you too shall one day be fair and hold the mirror before your own beauty.  Then your soul will shudder with divine desires; and there will be worship even in your vanity! This indeed is the secret of the soul: only when the hero has deserted the soul does there approach it in dreams – the superhero.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Famous Philosophers Y OU have served the people and the people’s superstitions, all you famous philosophers! – you have not served truth! And it is precisely for that reason that they paid you reverence.  And for that reason too they endured your disbelief, because it was a joke and a bypath for the people.  Thus the lord indulges his slaves and even enjoys their insolence.  But he who is hated by the people as a wolf is by the dogs: he is the free spirit, the enemy of fetters, the non-worshipper, the dweller in forests.  To hunt him from his hiding-place – the people always called that ‘having a sense of right’: they have always set their sharpest-toothed dogs upon him.  ‘For where the people are, truth is! Woe to him who seeks!’ That is how it has been from the beginning.  You sought to make the people justified in their reverence: that you called ‘will to truth’, you famous philosophers! And your heart always said to itself:’ I came from the people: God’s voice, too, came to me from them.’ You have always been obstinate and cunning, like the ass, as the people’s advocate.  And many a man of power who wanted to fare well with the people harnessed in front of his horses – a little ass, a famous philosopher.  And now I should like you to throw the lion-skin right off yourselves, you famous philosophers! The spotted skin of the beast of prey and the matted hair of the inquirer, the seeker, the overcomer! Ah, for me to learn to believe in your ‘genuineness’ you would first have to break your will to venerate.  Genuine – that is what I call him who goes into godforsaken deserts and has broken his venerating heart.  In the yellow sand and burned by the sun, perhaps he blinks thirstily at the islands filled with springs where living creatures rest beneath shady trees.  But his thirst does not persuade him to become like these comfortable creatures: for where there are oases there are also idols.  Hungered, violent, solitary, godless: that is how the lion-will wants to be.  Free from the happiness of serfs, redeemed from gods and worship, fearless and fearful, great and solitary: that is how the will of the genuine man is.  The genuine men, the free spirits, have always dwelt in the desert, as the lords of the desert; but in the towns dwell the well-fed famous philosophers – the draught animals.  For they always, as asses, pull – the people’s cart! Not that I am wroth with them for that: however, they are still servants and beasts in harness, even when they glitter with golden gear.  And they have often been good and praiseworthy servants.  For thus speaks virtue: ‘If you must be a servant, then seek him whom you can serve best! ‘The spirit and the virtue of your lord should thrive because you are his servant: thus you yourself will thrive with your lord’s spirit and virtue!’ And in truth, you famous philosophers, you servants of the people, you yourselves have thrived with the spirit and virtue of the people – and the people have thrived through you! It is to your honour I say this! But you are still of the people even in your virtue, of the people with their purblind eyes – of the people who do not know what spirit is! Spirit is the life that itself strikes into life: through its own torment it increases its own knowledge – did you know that before? And this is the spirit’s happiness: to be anointed and by tears consecrated as a sacrificial beast – did you know that before? And the blindness of the blind man and his seeking and groping shall yet bear witness to the power of the sun into which he gazed – did you know that before? And the enlightened man shall learn to build with mountains! It is a small thing for the spirit to move mountains – did you know that before? You know only the sparks of the spirit: but you do not see the anvil which the spirit is, nor the ferocity of its hammer! In truth, you do not know the spirit’s pride! But even less could you endure the spirit’s modesty, if it should ever deign to speak! And you have never yet dared to cast your spirit into a pit of snow: you are not hot enough for that! Thus you do not know the rapture of its coldness, either.  But you behave in all things in too familiar a way with the spirit; and you have often made of wisdom a poorhouse and hospital for bad poets.  You are no eagles: so neither do you know the spirit’s joy in terror.  And he who is not a bird shall not make his home above abysses.  You are tepid: but all deep knowledge flows cold.  The innermost wells of the spirit are ice-cold: a refreshment to hot hands and handlers.  You stand there respectable and stiff and with a straight back, you famous philosophers! – no strong wind or will propels you.  Have you never seen a sail faring over the sea, rounded and swelling and shuddering before the impetuosity of the wind? Like a sail, shuddering before the impetuosity of the spirit, my wisdom fares over the sea – my untamed wisdom! But you servants of the people, you famous philosophers – how could you fare with me? Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Last Supper F OR at this point the prophet interrupted the greeting of Zarathustra and his guests: he thrust himself forward like one with no time to lose, grasped Zarathustra’s hand and cried: ‘But Zarathustra! ‘One thing is more necessary than another, so you say yourself: very well, one thing is now more necessary to me than all others.  ‘A word in season: did you not invite me to a meal? And here are many who have travelled far.  You don’t intend to fob us off with speeches, do you? ‘Besides, you have all been thinking too much about freezing, drowning, choking, and other physical dangers: no one, however, has thought about my danger, that is, starving – ’ (Thus spoke the prophet; but when Zarathustra’s animals heard his words they ran off in terror.  For they saw that all they had brought home during the day would not suffice to cram this one philosopher.) ‘And dying of thirst,’ the prophet went on.  ‘And although I have heard water splashing here like speeches of wisdom, plenteous and unceasing: I – want wine ! ‘Not everyone is a born water-drinker, like Zarathustra.  Neither is water of any use to weary and drooping men: we ought to have wine – that alone brings sudden recovery and unpremeditated health!’ On this occasion, when the prophet desired wine, it happened that the king on the left, the silent one, also found speech for once.  ‘We have provided for wine,’ he said, ‘I and my brother, the king on the right: we have wine enough – a whole ass’s load of it.  So nothing is lacking but bread.’ ‘Bread?’ replied Zarathustra laughing.  ‘It is precisely bread that hermits do not have.  But man does not live by bread alone, but also by the flesh of good lambs, of which I have two.  ‘Let us quickly slaughter these and prepare them spicily with sage: that is how I like it.  And neither is there any lack of roots and fruits, fine enough even for gourmets and epicures; nor of nuts and other riddles that need cracking.  ‘Thus we shall very shortly partake of an excellent meal.  But whoever wants to eat with us must also lend a hand, even the kings.  For with Zarathustra even a king may be a cook.’ Everyone heartily agreed with this suggestion: except that the voluntary beggar exclaimed against flesh and wine and spices.  ‘Just listen to this glutton Zarathustra!’ he said jokingly: ‘does one take to caves and high mountains in order to partake of such meals? ‘To be sure, I now understand what he once taught us: “Praised be a moderate poverty!” and why he wants to abolish beggars.’ ‘Be of good cheer,’ Zarathustra replied to him, ‘as I am.  Stick to your usual custom, admirable man: grind your corn, drink your water, praise your own cooking: if only it makes you happy! ‘I am a law only for my own, I am not a law for all.  But he who belongs to me must be strong-limbed and nimble-footed, ‘merry in war and feasting, no mournful man, no dreamy fellow, ready for what is hardest as for a feast, healthy and whole.  ‘The best belongs to me and mine; and if we are not given it, we take it: the best food, the purest sky, the most robust thoughts, the fairest women!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra; the king on the right, however, replied: ‘Strange! Did one ever hear such clever things from the mouth of a philosopher? ‘And truly, it is the rarest thing to find a philosopher clever as well as wise, and not an ass.’ Thus spoke the king on the right and wondered; the ass, however, maliciously replied to his speech with ‘Ye-a.’ This, however, was the beginning of that long meal which is called ‘The Last Supper’ 50 in the history books.  And during that meal nothing was spoken of but the Higher Man .  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Greeting I T was only in the late afternoon that Zarathustra, after long, vain searching and roaming about, returned home to his cave.  But when he was opposite it, not twenty paces away, then occurred that which he now least expected: he heard again the great cry of distress .  And astonishing thing! this time it came from his own cave.  It was a protracted, manifold, strange cry, however, and Zarathustra clearly distinguished that it was composed of many voices: although, heard from a distance, it might sound like a cry from a single throat.  Thereupon, Zarathustra sprang towards his cave, and behold! what a spectacle awaited him after that concert! For all those whom he had passed by that day were seated together: the king on the right and the king on the left, the old sorcerer, the pope, the voluntary beggar, the shadow, the conscientious man of the spirit, the sorrowful prophet, and the ass; the ugliest man, however, had placed a crown upon his head and slung two purple sashes around him, for, like all the ugly, he loved to disguise and embellish himself.  But in the midst of this melancholy company stood Zarathustra’s eagle, agitated and with feathers ruffled, for he had been expected to answer too much for which his pride had no answer; the wise serpent, however, hung about its neck.  Zarathustra beheld all this with great amazement; then, however, he examined each of his guests with gentle curiosity, read what was in their souls, and was amazed anew.  In the meantime the assembled guests had risen from their seats and were respectfully waiting for Zarathustra to speak.  Zarathustra, however, spoke thus: You despairing men! You strange men! So was it your cry of distress I heard? And now I know, too, where to seek him whom I sought today in vain: the Higher Man – he sits in my own cave, the Higher Man! But why am I surprised! Have I myself not enticed him to me with honey offerings and cunning bird-calls of my happiness? But it seems to me you are ill adapted for company, you disturb one another’s hearts, you criers of distress, when you sit here together? First of all someone else must come, someone to make you laugh again, a good, cheerful Jack Pudding, a dancer and breeze and madcap, some old fool or other: – what do you think? But forgive me, you despairing men, that I speak before you such petty words, truly unworthy of such guests I But you do not guess what makes my heart wanton: you yourselves do it, and the sight of you, forgive me for it! For anyone beholding a man in despair grows brave.  To encourage a despairing man – anyone thinks himself strong enough for that.  To me have you given this strength – a goodly guest-gift, my exalted guests! Very well, do not be angry with me if I offer you something of mine.  This is my kingdom and my domain: but what is mine shall be yours for this evening and this night.  My animals shall serve you: let my cave be your resting place! No one shall despair at my hearth and home, I protect everyone from his wild animals in my preserve.  And that is the first thing I offer you: security! The second, however, is: my little finger.  And when you have that, take the whole hand, very well! and the heart in addition! Welcome to this place, welcome, my guests! Thus spoke Zarathustra and laughed with love and mischievousness.  After this greeting, his guests bowed themselves again and held a respectful silence; the king on the right, however, replied to him in their name.  By the manner in which you have offered us hand and greeting, O Zarathustra, do we recognize you as Zarathustra.  You have humbled yourself before us; you have almost injured our respect: but who could have humbled himself with such pride as you? That uplifts us ourselves, it is a refreshment to our eyes and hearts.  Just to see this would we climb higher mountains than this mountain.  For we have come as sightseers, we wanted to see what makes sad eyes bright.  And behold, already all our distressful crying is over.  Already our hearts and minds are opened and delighted.  Little is needed for our hearts to grow wanton.  Nothing more gladdening grows on earth, O Zarathustra, than an exalted, robust will: it is the earth’s fairest growth.  A whole landscape is refreshed by one such tree.  To the pine-tree, O Zarathustra, do I compare him who grows up like you: tall, silent, hard, alone, of the finest, supplest wood, magnificent – at last, however, reaching out with strong, green branches for its domain, asking bold questions of the winds and storms and whatever is at home in the heights, replying more boldly, a commander, a victor: oh who would not climb high mountains to behold such trees? The gloomy man, too, and the ill-constituted, refresh themselves at your tree, O Zarathustra; at your glance even the restless man grows secure and heals his heart.  And truly, many eyes today are raised to your mountain and your tree; a great longing has arisen, and many have learned to ask: Who is Zarathustra? And he into whose ear you have ever poured your song and your honey: all the hidden men, the hermits and hermit-couples, say all at once to their hearts: ‘Does Zarathustra still live? There is no longer any point in living, it is all one, everything is in vain: except we live with Zarathustra!’ ‘Why does he not come, he who has proclaimed himself so long?’ thus many ask.  ‘Has solitude devoured him? Or should we perhaps go to him?’ Now solitude itself yields and breaks apart and can no longer contain its dead.  The resurrected are to be seen everywhere.  Now the waves rise and rise around your mountain, O Zarathustra.  And however high your height may be, many must reach up to you: your boat shall not sit in die dry for much longer.  And that we despairing men have now come into your cave and are already no longer despairing: that is only a sign and omen that better men are on their way to you; for this itself is on its way to you, the last remnant of God among men, that is: all men possessed by great longing, great disgust, great satiety, all who do not want to live except they learn to hope again – except they learn from you, O Zarathustra, the great hope! Thus spoke the king on the right and grasped Zarathustra’s hand to kiss it; but Zarathustra resisted his adoration and stepped back startled, silently and abruptly, as if escaping into the far distance.  But after a short while he was again with his guests, regarded them with clear, questioning eyes, and said: My guests, you Higher Men, I will speak clearly and in plain German to you.  49 It is not for you that I have been waiting in these mountains.  (‘Clearly and in plain German? God help us!’ said the king on the left to himself at this point; ‘it is clear he does not know the good Germans, this wise man from the East! ‘But he means “uncouthly and in German” – very well! Nowadays that is not in quite the worst taste!’) Truly, you may all be Higher Men (Zarathustra went on): but for me – you are not high and strong enough.  For me, that is to say: for the inexorable that is silent within me but will not always be silent.  And if you belong to me, it is not as my right arm.  For he who himself stands on sick and tender legs, as you do, wants above all, whether he knows it or conceals it from himself: to be spared .  My arms and my legs, however, I do not spare, I do not spare my warriors : how, then, could you be fit for my warfare? With you I should still spoil every victory.  And some of you would give in simply on hearing the loud beating of my drums.  Neither are you handsome enough nor sufficiently wellborn for me.  I need pure, smooth mirrors for my teaching; upon your surface even my own reflection is distorted.  Many a burden, many a memory weighs down your shoulders; many an evil dwarf crouches in your corners.  And there is hidden mob in you, too.  And although you are high and of a higher type, much in you is crooked and malformed.  There is no smith in the world who could hammer you straight and into shape for me.  You are only bridges: may higher men than you step across upon you! You are steps: so do not be angry with him who climbs over you into bis height! From your seed there may one day grow for me a genuine son and perfect heir: but that is far ahead.  You yourselves are not those to whom my heritage and name belong.  It is not for you that I wait here in these mountains, it is not with you that I may go down for the last time.  You have come to me only as omens that higher men are already on their way to me, not men possessed of great longing, great disgust, great satiety, and that which you called the remnant of God, No! No! Thrice No! It is for others that I wait here in these mountains and I will not lift my foot from here without them, for higher, stronger, more victorious, more joyful men, such as are square-built in body and soul: laughing lions must come! O my guests, you strange men, have you yet heard nothing of my children? And that they are on their way to me? Speak to me of my gardens, of my Blissful Islands, of my beautiful new race, why do you not speak of them? This guest-gift do I beg of your love, that you speak to me of my children.  In them I am rich, for them I became poor: what have I not given, what would I not give, to possess one thing: these children, this living garden, these trees of life of my will and of my highest hope! Thus spoke Zarathustra and suddenly halted in his discourse: for his longing overcame him and he closed his eyes and mouth because his heart was so moved.  And all his guests, too, remained silent and stood still and dismayed: except that the old prophet started to make signs with his hands and his features.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra At Noontide A ND Zarathustra ran and ran and found no one else and was alone and found himself again and again and enjoyed and relished his solitude and thought of good things, for hours on end.  About the hour of noon, however, when the sun stood exactly over Zarathustra’s head, he passed by an old gnarled and crooked tree which was embraced around by the abundant love of a vine and hidden from itself: from the vine an abundance of yellow grapes hung down to the wanderer.  Then he felt a desire to relieve a little thirst and to pluck himself a grape; but when he had already extended his arm to do so, he felt an even greater desire to do something else: that is, to lie down beside the tree at the hour of perfect noon and sleep.  This Zarathustra did; and no sooner had he lain down upon the ground, in the stillness and secrecy of the multicoloured grass, than he forgot his little thirst and fell asleep.  For, as Zarathustra’s saying has it: One thing is more necessary than another.  Only his eyes remained open – for they were not wearied of seeing and admiring the tree and the love of the vine.  In falling asleep, however, Zarathustra spoke thus to his heart: Soft! Soft! Has the world not just become perfect? What has happened to me? As a delicate breeze, unseen, dances upon the smooth sea, light, light as a feather: thus – does sleep dance upon me.  My eyes it does not close, my soul it leaves awake.  It is light, truly I light as a feather.  It persuades me, I know not how; it inwardly touches me with a caressing hand, it compels me.  Yes, it compels me, so that my soul stretches itself out: how lengthy and weary my soul has grown, my strange soul! Has a seventh day’s evening come to it just at noontide? Has it wandered too long, blissfully, among good and ripe things? It stretches itself out, long, long – longer! it lies still, my strange soul.  It has tasted too many good things, this golden sadness oppresses it, it makes a wry mouth.  Like a ship that has entered its stillest bay – now it leans against the earth, weary of long voyages and uncertain seas.  Is the earth not more faithful? As such a ship lies against the shore, nestles against the shore – there it suffices for a spider to spin its thread out to it from the land.  No stronger ropes are needed.  As such a weary ship rests in the stillest bay: thus do I now rest dose to the earth, faithful, trusting, waiting, fastened to it by the finest threads.  Oh happiness! Oh happiness! Would you sing, O my soul? You lie in the grass.  But this is the secret, solemn hour when no shepherd plays his flute.  Take care! Hot noontide sleeps upon the fields.  Do not sing! Soft! The world is perfect.  Do not sing, you grass bird, O my soul! Do not even whisper! Just see – soft! old noontide sleeps, it moves its mouth: has it not just drunk a drop of happiness – an ancient brown drop of golden happiness, of golden wine? Something glides across it, its happiness laughs.  Thus – does a god laugh.  Soft! ‘Happiness; how little attains happiness!’ Thus I spoke once and thought myself wise.  But it was a blasphemy: I have learned that now.  Wise fools speak better.  Precisely the least thing, the gentlest, lightest, the rustling of a lizard, a breath, a moment, a twinkling of the eye – little makes up the quality of the best happiness.  Soft! What has happened to me? Listen! Has time flown away? Do I not fall? Have I not fallen – listen! into the well of eternity? What is happening to me? Still! Is it stinging me – alas – in the heart? In the heart! oh break, break, heart, after such happiness, after such stinging! What? Has the world not just become perfect? Round and ripe? Oh, golden round ring 47 – whither does it fly? Away, after it! Away! Soft – (and at this point Zarathustra stretched himself and felt that he was asleep).  Up! (he said to himself) up, sleeper! You noontide sleeper! Very well, come on, old legs I It is time and past time, you have still a good way to go.  You have slept your fill, how long? Half an eternity! Very well, come on, my old heart! For how long after such a sleep may you – wake your fill? (But then he fell asleep again, and his soul contradicted him and resisted and again lay down.) ‘Let me alone! Soft! Has the world not just become perfect? Oh perfect as a round golden ball!’ Get up (said Zarathustra), you little thief, you lazybones! 48 What! Still stretching, yawning, sighing, falling into deep wells? But who are you then, O my soul? (And at this point he started, for a ray of sunlight had glanced down from the sky on to his face.) O sky above me (he said, sighing, and sat upright), are you watching me? Are you listening to my strange soul? When will you drink this drop of dew that has fallen upon all earthly things – when will you drink this strange soul – when, well of eternity! serene and terrible noontide abyss! when will you drink my soul back into yourself? Thus spoke Zarathustra and raised himself from his bed beside the tree as from a strange intoxication: and behold, the sun was still standing straight above his head.  One might rightly gather from that, however, that Zarathustra had not been sleeping for long.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Higher Man 1 W HEN I went to men for the first time, I committed the folly of hermits, the great folly: I set myself in the market-place.  And when I spoke to everyone, I spoke to no one.  In the evening, however, tight-rope walkers and corpses were my companions; and I myself was almost a corpse.  With the new morning, however, came to me a new truth: then I learned to say: ‘What are the market-place and the mob and the mob’s confusion and the mob’s long ears to me!’ You Higher Men, learn this from me: In the market-place no one believes in Higher Men.  And if you want to speak there, very well, do so! But the mob blink and say: ‘We are all equal.’ ‘You Higher Men’ – thus the mob blink – ‘there are no Higher Men, we are all equal, man is but man, before God – we are all equal!’ Before God! But now this God has died.  And let us not be equal before the mob.  You Higher Men, depart from the market-place! 2 Before God! But now this God has died! You Higher Men, this God was your greatest danger.  Only since he has lain in the grave have you again been resurrected.  Only now does the great noontide come, only now does the Higher Man become – lord and master! Have you understood this saying, O my brothers? Are you terrified: do your hearts fail? Does the abyss here yawn for you? Does the hound of Hell here yelp at you? Very well! Come on, you Higher Men! Only now does the mountain of mankind’s future labour.  God has died: now we desire – that the Superman shall live.  3 The most cautious people ask today: ‘How may man still be preserved?’ Zarathustra, however, asks as the sole and first one to do so: ‘How shall man be overcome? ’ The Superman lies close to my heart, be is my paramount and sole concern – and not man: not the nearest, not the poorest, not the most suffering, not the best.  O my brothers, what I can love in man is that he is a going-across and a going-down.  And in you, too, there is much that makes me love and hope.  That you have despised, you Higher Men, that makes me hope.  For the great despisers are the great reverers.  That you have despaired, there is much to honour in that.  For you have not learned how to submit, you have not learned petty prudence.  For today the petty people have become lord and master: they all preach submission and acquiescence and prudence and diligence and consideration and the long et cetera of petty virtues.  What is womanish, what stems from slavishness and especially from the mob hotchpotch: that now wants to become master of mankind’s entire destiny – oh disgust! disgust! disgust! That questions and questions and never tires: ‘How may man preserve himself best, longest, most agreeably?’ With that – they are the masters of the present.  Overcome for me these masters of the present, O my brothers – these petty people: they are the Superman’s greatest danger! Overcome, you Higher Men, the petty virtues, the petty prudences, the sand-grain discretion, the ant-swarm inanity, miserable ease, the ‘happiness of the greatest number’! And rather despair than submit.  And truly, I love you because you do not know how to live today, you Higher Men! For thus do you – live best! 4 Do you possess courage, O my brothers? Are you stouthearted? Not courage in the presence of witnesses, but hermits’ and eagles’ courage, which not even a god observes any more? I do not call cold-spirited, mulish, blind, or intoxicated men stout-hearted.  He possesses heart who knows fear but masters fear; who sees the abyss, but sees it with pride .  He who sees the abyss, but with an eagle’s eyes – he who grasps the abyss with an eagle’s claws: he possesses courage.  5 ‘Man is evil’ – all the wisest men have told me that to comfort me.  Ah, if only it be true today! For evil is man’s best strength.  ‘Man must grow better and more evil’ – thus do I teach.  The most evil is necessary for the Superman’s best.  It may have been good for that preacher of the petty people to bear and suffer the sin of man.  I, however, rejoice in great sin as my great consolation .  But these things are not said for long ears.  Neither does every word belong in every mouth.  They are subtle, remote things: sheep’s hooves ought not to grasp for them! 6 You Higher Men, do you think I am here to put right what you have done badly? Or that I mean henceforth to make more comfortable beds for you sufferers? Or show you restless, erring, straying men new, easier footpaths? No! No! Thrice No! More and more, better and better men of your kind must perish – for life must be harder and harder for you.  Only thus, only thus does man grow to the height where the lightning can strike and shatter him: high enough for the lightning! My mind and longing go out to the few, the protracted, the remote things: what are your many, little, brief miseries to me! You have not yet suffered enough! For you suffer from yourselves, you have not yet suffered from man .  You would lie if you said otherwise! None of you suffer from what I have suffered.  7 It does not suffice me that the lightning no longer does harm.  I do not want to conduct it away: it shall learn – to work for me .  My wisdom has long collected itself like a cloud, it is growing stiller and darker.  Thus does every wisdom that shall one day give birth to lightnings.  I do not want to be light for these men of the present, or be called light by them.  These men – I want to blind: lightning of my wisdom! put out their eyes! 8 Do not will beyond your powers: there is an evil falsity about those who will beyond their powers.  Especially when they will great things! For they awaken mistrust of great things, these subtle fabricators and actors: until at last they are false to themselves, squint-eyed, whitewashed rottenness, cloaked with clever words, with pretended virtues, with glittering, false deeds.  Guard yourselves well against that, you Higher Men! For I count nothing more valuable and rare today than honesty.  Does this present not belong to the mob? The mob, however, does not know what is great or small, what is straight and honest: it is innocently crooked, it always lies.  9 Have a healthy mistrust today, you Higher Men, you stouthearted, open-hearted men! And keep your reasons secret! For this present belongs to the mob.  Who could overturn with reasons what the mob has once learned to believe without reasons? And in the market-place one convinces with gestures.  But reasons make the mob mistrustful.  And when truth has triumphed for once, then you have asked with healthy mistrust: ‘What mighty error has fought fork?’ Be on your guard, too, against the learned! They hate you: for they are unfruitful! They have cold, dried-up eyes, before which all birds lie stripped of their feathers.  They boast that they do not tell lies: but inability to lie is far from being love of truth.  Be on your guard I Freedom from fever is far from being knowledge! I do not believe frozen spirits.  He who cannot lie does not know what truth is.  10 If you want to rise high, use your own legs! Do not let yourselves be carried up, do not sit on the backs and heads of strangers! But did you mount horse? Do you now ride pell-mell up to your goal? Very well, my friend! But your lame foot also sits with you on your horse! When you reach your goal, when you jump from your horse: precisely upon your height you Higher Man, will you stumble! 11 You creators, you Higher Men! One is pregnant only with one’s own child.  Let nothing impose upon you, nothing persuade you! For who is your neighbour? And if you do things ‘for your neighbour’, still you do not create for him! Unlearn this ‘for’, you creators: your very virtue wants you to have nothing to do with ‘for’ and ‘for the sake of and ‘because’.  You should stop your ears to these false little words.  This ‘for one’s neighbour’ is the virtue only of petty people: there they say ‘birds of a feather’ and ‘one good turn deserves another’ – they have neither right to nor strength for your selfishness! The prudence and providence of pregnancy is in your selfishness! What no one has yet seen, the fruit: that is protected and indulged and nourished by your whole love.  Where your whole love is, with your child, there too is your whole virtue! Your work, your will is your ‘neighbour’: let no false values persuade you otherwise! 12 You creators, you Higher Men! Whoever has to give birth is sick; but whoever has given birth is unclean.  Ask the women: one does not give birth for pleasure.  The pain makes hens and poets cackle.  You creators, there is much in you that is unclean.  That is because you have to be mothers.  A new child: oh how much new filth has also entered the world I Go aside I And whoever has given birth should wash his soul clean! 13 Do not be virtuous beyond your powers I And do not ask anything improbable of yourselves! Follow in the footsteps of your fathers’ virtue! How would you climb high if the will of your fathers did not climb with you? But he who wants to be a first-born should see that he does not also become a last-born I And you should not pretend to be saints in those matters in which your fathers were vicious! He whose fathers passed their time with women, strong wine, and roast pork, what would it be if he demanded chastity of himself? It would be a piece of folly! Truly, I think it would be much for such a one to be the husband of one or two or three women.  And if he founded monasteries and wrote above the doors: ‘The way to holiness’, I should still say: What of it! it is another piece of folly! He has founded for himself a house of refuge and correction: much good may it do him I But I have no faith in it.  It is what one takes into solitude that grows there, the beast within included.  And so, many should be dissuaded from solitude.  Has there ever been anything filthier on earth than the saints of the desert? Not only the devil was loose around them – but the swine, too.  14 Timid, ashamed, awkward, like a tiger whose leap has failed: this is how I have often seen you slink aside, you Higher Men.  A throw you made had failed.  But what of that, you dice-throwers! You have not learned to play and mock as a man ought to play and mock! Are we not always seated at a great table for play and mockery? And if great things you attempted have turned out failures, does that mean you yourselves are – failures? And if you yourselves have turned out failures, does that mean – man is a failure? If man has turned out a failure, however: very well! come on! 15 The higher its type, the less often does a thing succeed.  You Higher Men here, are you not all – failures? Be of good courage, what does it matter! How much is still possible! Learn to laugh at yourselves as a man ought to laugh! And no wonder you have failed and half succeeded, you half-broken men! Does there not strive and struggle in you -mankind’s future ? Mankind’s most distant, most profound questions, his reaching to the furthest stars, his prodigious power: does all that not foam together in your pot? No wonder many a pot is shattered! Learn to laugh at yourselves, as a man ought to laugh.  You Higher Men, oh how much is still possible! And truly, how much has already succeeded! How rich this earth is in good little perfect things, in well-constituted things! Set good little perfect things around you, you Higher Men! Things whose golden ripeness heals the heart.  Perfect things teach hope.  16 What has been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not the saying of him who said: ‘Woe to those who laugh!’ Did he himself find on earth no reason for laughter? If so, he sought badly.  Even a child could find reasons.  He – did not love sufficiently: otherwise he would also have loved us, the laughers I But he hated and jeered at us, he promised us wailing and gnashing of teeth.  Does one then straightway have to curse where one does not love? That – seems to me bad taste.  But that is what he did, this uncompromising man.  He sprang from the mob.  And he himself did not love sufficiently: otherwise he would not have been so angry that he was not loved.  Great love does not desire love – it desires more.  Avoid all such uncompromising men! They are a poor, sick type, a mob type: they look upon this life with an ill will, they have an evil eye for this earth.  Avoid all such uncompromising men! They have heavy feet and sultry hearts – they do not know how to dance.  How could the earth be light to such men! 17 All good things approach their goal crookedly.  Like cats they arch their backs, they purr inwardly at their approaching happiness – all good things laugh.  His step betrays whether a man is stepping along his own path: so watch me walk! But he who approaches his goal, dances.  And truly, I have not become a statue, I do not stand here stiff, stumpy, stony, a pillar; I love to run fast.  And although there are swamps and thick afflictions on earth, he who has light feet runs even across mud and dances as upon swept ice.  Lift up your hearts, my brothers, high, higher! And do not forget your legs I Lift up your legs, too, you fine dancers: and better still, stand on your heads! 18 This laugher’s crown, this rose-wreath crown: I myself have set this crown on my head, I myself have canonized my laughter.  I have found no other strong enough for it today.  Zarathustra the dancer, Zarathustra the light, who beckons with his wings, ready for flight, beckoning to all birds, prepared and ready, blissfully light-hearted: Zarathustra the prophet, Zarathustra the laughing prophet, no impatient nor uncompromising man, one who loves jumping and escapades; 51 I myself have set this crown on my head! 19 Lift up your hearts, my brothers, high! higher! And do not forget your legs! Lift up your legs, too, you fine dancers: and better still, stand on your heads! There are beasts who are heavy-footed even in happiness, there are those who are clumsy-footed from birth.  They exert themselves strangely, like an elephant trying to stand on its head.  But better to be foolish with happiness than foolish with misfortune, better to dance clumsily than to walk lamely.  So learn from me my wisdom: even the worst thing has two good sides, even the worst thing has good dancing legs: so learn, you Higher Men, how to stand on your own proper legs! So unlearn trumpeting of affliction and all mob-sorrowfulness! Oh how sad the Jack Puddings of the mob seem to me at present! This present, however, belongs to the mob.  20 Be like the wind when it rushes forth from its mountain caves: it will dance to its own pipe, the seas tremble and leap under its footsteps.  That which gives wings to asses and milks lionesses, all praise to that unruly spirit that comes to all the present and all the mob like a storm-wind, – that is enemy to all thistle-heads and prying noses and to all withered leaves and weeds: all praise to that wild, good, free storm-spirit that dances upon swamps and afflictions as upon meadows! That hates the wasted dogs of the mob and all the ill-constituted brood of gloom: all praise to this spirit of all free spirits, the laughing storm that blows dust in the eyes of all the dim-sighted and ulcerated.  You Higher Men, the worst about you is: none of you has learned to dance as a man ought to dance – to dance beyond yourselves! What does it matter that you are failures! How much is still possible! So learn to laugh beyond yourselves! Lift up your hearts, you fine dancers, high! higher! and do not forget to laugh well! This laugher’s crown, this rose-wreath crown: to you, my brothers, do I throw this crown! I have canonized laughter; you Higher Men, learn – to laugh! Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Night Song I T is night: now do all leaping fountains speak louder.  And my soul too is a leaping fountain.  It is night: only now do all songs of lovers awaken.  And my soul too is the song of a lover.  Something unquenched, unquenchable, is in me, that wants to speak out.  A craving for love is in me, that itself speaks the language of love.  Light am I: ah, that I were night! But this is my solitude, that I am girded round with light.  Ah, that I were dark and obscure! How I would suck at the breasts of light! And I should bless you, little sparkling stars and glowworms above! – and be happy in your gifts of light.  But I live in my own light, I drink back into myself the flames that break from me.  I do not know the joy of the receiver; and I have often dreamed that stealing must be more blessed than receiving.  It is my poverty that my hand never rests from giving; it is my envy that I see expectant eyes and illumined nights of desire.  Oh wretchedness of all givers! Oh eclipse of my sun! Oh craving for desire! Oh ravenous hunger in satiety! They take from me: but do I yet touch their souls? A gulf stands between giving and receiving; and the smallest gulf must be bridged at last.  A hunger grows from out of my beauty: I should like to rob those to whom I give – thus do I hunger after wickedness.  Withdrawing my hand when another hand already reaches out to it; hesitating, like the waterfall that hesitates even in its plunge – thus do I hunger after wickedness.  Such vengeance does my abundance concoct: such spite wells from my solitude.  My joy in giving died in giving, my virtue grew weary of itself through its abundance! The danger for him who always gives, is that he may lose his shame; the hand and heart of him who distributes grow callous through sheer distributing.  My eye no longer overflows with the shame of suppliants; my hand has become too hard for the trembling of hands that have been filled.  Where have the tears of my eye and the bloom of my heart gone? Oh solitude of all givers! Oh silence of all light-givers! Many suns circle in empty space: to all that is dark they speak with their light – to me they are silent.  Oh, this is the enmity of light towards what gives light: unpitying it travels its way.  Unjust towards the light-giver in its inmost heart, cold towards suns – thus travels every sun.  Like a storm the suns fly along their courses; that is their travelling.  They follow their inexorable will; that is their coldness.  Oh, it is only you, obscure, dark ones, who extract warmth from light-givers! Oh, only you drink milk and comfort from the udders of light! Ah, ice is around me, my hand is burned with ice! Ah, thirst is in me, which yearns after your thirst! It is night: ah, that I must be light! And thirst for the things of night! And solitude! It is night: now my longing breaks from me like a well-spring – I long for speech.  It is night: now do all leaping fountains speak louder.  And my soul too is a leaping fountain.  It is night: only now do all songs of lovers awaken.  And my soul too is the song of a lover.  Thus sang Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Self-Overcoming W HAT urges you on and arouses your ardour, you wisest of men, do you call it ‘will to truth’? Will to the conceivability of all being: that is what I call your will! You first want to make all being conceivable: for, with a healthy mistrust, you doubt whether it is in fact conceivable.  But it must bend and accommodate itself to you! Thus will your will have it.  It must become smooth and subject to the mind as the mind’s mirror and reflection.  That is your entire will, you wisest men; it is a will to power; and that is so even when you talk of good and evil and of the assessment of values.  You want to create the world before which you can kneel: this is your ultimate hope and intoxication.  The ignorant, to be sure, the people – they are like a river down which a boat swims: and in the boat, solemn and disguised, sit the assessments of value.  You put your will and your values upon the river of becoming; what the people believe to be good and evil betrays to me an ancient will to power.  It was you, wisest men, who put such passengers in this boat and gave them splendour and proud names – you and your ruling will! Now the river bears your boat along: it has to bear it.  It is of small account if the breaking wave foams and angrily opposes its keel! It is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good and evil, you wisest men, it is that will itself, the will to power, the unexhausted, procreating life-will.  But that you may understand my teaching about good and evil, I shall relate to you my teaching about life and about the nature of all living creatures.  I have followed the living creature, I have followed the greatest and the smallest paths, that I might understand its nature.  I caught its glance in a hundredfold mirror when its mouth was closed, that its eye might speak to me.  And its eye did speak to me.  But wherever I found living creatures, there too I heard the language of obedience.  All living creatures are obeying creatures.  And this is the second thing: he who cannot obey himself will be commanded.  That is the nature of living creatures.  But this is the third thing I heard: that commanding is more difficult than obeying.  And not only because the commander bears the burden of all who obey, and that this burden can easily crush him.  In all commanding there appeared to me to be an experiment and a risk: and the living creature always risks himself when he commands.  Yes, even when he commands himself: then also must he make amends for his commanding.  He must become judge and avenger and victim of his own law.  How has this come about? thus I asked myself.  What persuades the living creature to obey and to command and to practise obedience even in commanding? Listen now to my teaching, you wisest men! Test in earnest whether I have crept into the heart of life itself and down to the roots of its heart! Where I found a living creature, there I found will to power; and even in the will of the servant I found the will to be master.  The will of the weaker persuades it to serve the stronger; its will wants to be master over those weaker still: this delight alone it is unwilling to forgo.  And as the lesser surrenders to the greater, that it may have delight and power over the least of all, so the greatest, too, surrenders and for the sake of power stakes – life.  The devotion of the greatest is to encounter risk and danger and play dice for death.  And where sacrifice and service and loving glances are, there too is will to be master.  There the weaker steals by secret paths into the castle and even into the heart of the more powerful – and steals the power.  And life itself told me this secret: ‘Behold,’ it said, ‘I am that which must overcome itself again and again .  ‘To be sure, you call it will to procreate or impulse towards a goal, towards the higher, more distant, more manifold: but all this is one and one secret.  ‘I would rather perish than renounce this one thing; and truly, where there is perishing and the falling of leaves, behold, there life sacrifices itself – for the sake of power! ‘That I have to be struggle and becoming and goal and conflict of goals: ah, he who divines my will surely divines, too, along what crooked paths it has to go! ‘Whatever I create and however much I love it – soon I have to oppose it and my love: thus will my will have it.  ‘And you too, enlightened man, are only a path and footstep of my will: truly, my will to power walks with the feet of your will to truth! ‘He who shot the doctrine of “will to existence” at truth certainly did not hit the truth: this will – does not exist! ‘For what does not exist cannot will; but that which is in existence, how could it still want to come into existence? ‘Only where life is, there is also will: not will to life, but – so I teach you – will to power! ‘The living creature values many things higher than life itself; yet out of this evaluation itself speaks – the will to power!’ Thus life once taught me: and with this teaching do I solve the riddle of your hearts, you wisest men.  Truly, I say to you: Unchanging good and evil does not exist! From out of themselves they must overcome themselves again and again.  You exert power with your values and doctrines of good and evil, you assessors of values; and this is your hidden love and the glittering, trembling, and overflowing of your souls.  But a mightier power and a new overcoming grow from out your values: egg and egg-shell break against them.  And he who has to be a creator in good and evil, truly, has first to be a destroyer and break values.  Thus the greatest evil belongs with the greatest good: this, however, is the creative good.  Let us speak of this, you wisest men, even if it is a bad thing.  To be silent is worse; all suppressed truths become poisonous.  And let everything that can break upon our truths – break! There is many a house still to build! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Reading and Writing O F all writings I love only that which is written with blood.  Write with blood: and you will discover that blood is spirit.  It is not an easy thing to understand unfamiliar blood: I hate the reading idler.  He who knows the reader, does nothing further for the reader.  Another century of readers – and spirit itself will stink.  That everyone can learn to read will ruin in the long run not only writing, but thinking too.  Once spirit was God, then it became man, and now it is even becoming mob.  He who writes in blood and aphorisms does not want to be read, he wants to be learned by heart.  In the mountains the shortest route is from peak to peak, but for that you must have long legs.  Aphorisms should be peaks, and those to whom they are spoken should be big and tall of stature.  The air thin and pure, danger near, and the spirit full of a joyful wickedness: these things suit one another.  I want hobgoblins around me, for I am courageous.  Courage that scares away phantoms makes hobgoblins for itself – courage wants to laugh.  I no longer feel as you do: this cloud which I see under me, this blackness and heaviness at which I laugh – precisely this is your thunder-cloud.  You look up when you desire to be exalted.  And I look down, because I am exalted.  Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted? He who climbs upon the highest mountains laughs at all tragedies, real or imaginary.  Untroubled, scornful, outrageous – that is how wisdom wants us to be: she is a woman and never loves anyone but a warrior.  You tell me: ‘Life is hard to bear.’ But if it were otherwise why should you have your pride in the morning and your resignation in the evening? Life is hard to bear: but do not pretend to be so tender! We are all of us pretty fine asses and assesses of burden! What have we in common with the rosebud, which trembles because a drop of dew is lying upon it? It is true: we love life, not because we are used to living but because we are used to loving.  There is always a certain madness in love.  But also there is always a certain method in madness.  And to me too, who love life, it seems that butterflies and soap-bubbles, and whatever is like them among men, know most about happiness.  To see these light, foolish, dainty, affecting little souls flutter about – that moves Zarathustra to tears and to song.  I should believe only in a God who understood how to dance.  And when I beheld my devil, I found him serious, thorough, profound, solemn: it was the Spirit of Gravity – through him all things are ruined.  One does not kill by anger but by laughter.  Come, let us kill the Spirit of Gravity! I have learned to walk: since then I have run.  I have learned to fly: since then I do not have to be pushed in order to move.  Now I am nimble, now I fly, now I see myself under myself, now a god dances within me.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra PENGUIN BOOKS Published by the Penguin Group Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL , England Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2 Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads, Albany, Auckland, New Zealand Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL , England www.penguin.com This translation first published 1961 Reprinted with new Introduction 1969 Reprinted with new Chronology and Further Reading 2003 46 Copyright © R.  J.  Hollingdale, 1961, 1969 All rights reserved Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’ prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser 9780141904320 Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Vision and the Riddle 1 W HEN it became rumoured among the sailors that Zarathustra was on the ship – for a man from the Blissful Islands had gone on board at the same time as he – a great curiosity and expectancy arose.  But Zarathustra was silent for two days and was cold and deaf for sorrow, so that he responded neither to looks nor to questions.  But on the evening of the second day he opened his ears again, although he still remained silent: for there were many strange and dangerous things to hear on this ship, which had come from afar and had yet further to go.  Zarathustra, however, was a friend to all who take long journeys and do not want to live without danger.  And behold! in listening his tongue was loosened, and the ice of his heart broke: then he started to speak thus: To you, the bold venturers and adventurers and whoever has embarked with cunning sails upon dreadful seas, to you who are intoxicated by riddles, who take pleasure in twilight, whose soul is lured with flutes to every treacherous abyss – for you do not desire to feel for a rope with cowardly hand; and where you can guess you hate to calculate – to you alone do I tell this riddle that I saw – the vision of the most solitary man.  Lately I walked gloomily through a deathly-grey twilight, gloomily and sternly with compressed lips.  Not only one sun had gone down for me.  A path that mounted defiantly through boulders and rubble, a wicked, solitary path that bush or plant no longer cheered: a mountain path crunched under my foot’s defiance.  Striding mute over the mocking clatter of pebbles, trampling the stones that made it slip: thus my foot with effort forced itself upward.  Upward – despite the spirit that drew it downward, drew it towards the abyss, the Spirit of Gravity, my devil and archenemy.  Upward – although he sat upon me, half dwarf, half mole; crippled, crippling; pouring lead-drops into my ear, leaden thoughts into my brain.  ‘O Zarathustra,’ he said mockingly, syllable by syllable, ‘you stone of wisdom! You have thrown yourself high, but every stone that is thrown must – fall! ‘O Zarathustra, you stone of wisdom, you projectile, you star-destroyer! You have thrown yourself thus high, but every stone that is thrown – must fall! ‘Condemned by yourself and to your own stone-throwing: O Zarathustra, far indeed have you thrown your stone, but it will fall back upon you !’ Thereupon the dwarf fell silent; and he long continued so.  But his silence oppressed me; and to be thus in company is truly more lonely than to be alone! I climbed, I climbed, I dreamed, I thought, but everything oppressed me.  I was like a sick man wearied by his sore torment and reawakened from sleep by a worse dream.  But there is something in me that I call courage: it has always destroyed every discouragement in me.  This courage at last bade me stop and say: ‘Dwarf! You! Or I!’ For courage is the best destroyer – courage that attacks : for in every attack there is a triumphant shout.  Man, however, is the most courageous animal: with his courage he has overcome every animal.  With a triumphant shout he has even overcome every pain; human pain, however, is the deepest pain.  Courage also destroys giddiness at abysses: and where does man not stand at an abyss? Is seeing itself not – seeing abysses? Courage is the best destroyer: courage also destroys pity.  Pity, however, is the deepest abyss: as deeply as man looks into life, so deeply does he look also into suffering.  Courage, however, is the best destroyer, courage that attacks: it destroys even death, for it says: ‘Was that life? Well then! Once more!’ But there is a great triumphant shout in such a saying.  He who has ears to hear, let him hear.  2 ‘Stop, dwarf!’ I said.  ‘I! Or you! But I am the stronger of us two – you do not know my abysmal thought! That thought – you could not endure!’ Then something occurred which lightened me: for the dwarf jumped from my shoulder, the inquisitive dwarf! And he squatted down upon a stone in front of me.  But a gateway stood just where we had halted.  ‘Behold this gateway, dwarf!’ I went on: ‘it has two aspects.  Two paths come together here: no one has ever reached their end.  ‘This long lane behind us: it goes on for an eternity.  And that long lane ahead of us – that is another eternity.  ‘They are in opposition to one another, these paths; they abut on one another: and it is here at this gateway that they come together.  The name of the gateway is written above it: “Moment”.  ‘But if one were to follow them further and ever further and further: do you think, dwarf, that these paths would be in eternal opposition?’ ‘Everything straight lies,’ murmured the dwarf disdainfully.  ‘All truth is crooked, time itself is a circle.’ ‘Spirit of Gravity!’ I said angrily, ‘do not treat this too lightly! Or I shall leave you squatting where you are, Lame-foot – and I have carried you high ! ‘Behold this moment!’ I went on.  ‘From this gateway Moment a long, eternal lane runs back : an eternity lies behind us.  ‘Must not all things that can run have already run along this lane? Must not all things that can happen have already happened, been done, run past? ‘And if all things have been here before: what do you think of this moment, dwarf? Must not this gateway, too, have been here – before? ‘And are not all things bound fast together in such a way that this moment draws after it all future things? Therefore – draws itself too? ‘For all things that can run must also run once again forward along this long lane.  ‘And this slow spider that creeps along in the moonlight, and this moonlight itself, and I and you at this gateway whispering together, whispering of eternal things – must we not all have been here before? ‘ – and must we not return and run down that other lane out before us, down that long, terrible lane – must we not return eternally?’ Thus I spoke, and I spoke more and more softly: for I was afraid of my own thoughts and reservations.  Then, suddenly, I heard a dog bowling nearby.  Had I ever heard a dog howling in that way? My thoughts ran back.  Yes! When I was a child, in my most distant childhood: – then I heard a dog howling in that way.  And I saw it, too, bristling, its head raised, trembling in the stillest midnight, when even dogs believe in ghosts: – so that it moved me to pity.  For the full moon had just gone over the house, silent as death, it had just stopped still, a round glow, still upon the flat roof as if upon a forbidden place: that was what had terrified the dog: for dogs believe in thieves and ghosts.  And when I heard such howling again, it moved me to pity again.  Where had the dwarf now gone? And the gateway? And the spider? And all the whispering? Had I been dreaming? Had I awoken? All at once I was standing between wild cliffs, alone, desolate in the most desolate moonlight.  But there a man was lying! And there! The dog, leaping, bristling, whining; then it saw me coming – then it howled again, then it cried out – had I ever heard a dog cry so for help? 25 And truly, I had never seen the like of what I then saw.  I saw a young shepherd writhing, choking, convulsed, his face distorted; and a heavy, black snake was hanging out of his mouth.  Had I ever seen so much disgust and pallid horror on a face? Had he, perhaps, been asleep? Then the snake had crawled into his throat – and there it had bitten itself fast.  My hands tugged and tugged at the snake – in vain! they could not tug the snake out of the shepherd’s throat.  Then a voice cried from me: ‘Bite! Bite! ‘Its head off! Bite!’ – thus a voice cried from me, my horror, my hate, my disgust, my pity, all my good and evil cried out of me with a single cry.  You bold men around me! You venturers, adventurers, and those of you who have embarked with cunning sails upon undiscovered seas! You who take pleasure in riddles! Solve for me the riddle that I saw, interpret to me the vision of the most solitary man! For it was a vision and a premonition: what did I see in allegory? And who is it that must come one day? Who is the shepherd into whose mouth the snake thus crawled? Who is the man into whose throat all that is heaviest, blackest will thus crawl? The shepherd, however, bit as my cry had advised him; he bit with a good bite! He spat far away the snake’s head – and sprang up.  No longer a shepherd, no longer a man – a transformed being, surrounded with light, laughing ! Never yet on earth had any man laughed as he laughed! O my brothers, I heard a laughter that was no human laughter – and now a thirst consumes me, a longing that is never stilled.  My longing for this laughter consumes me: oh how do I endure still to live! And how could I endure to die now! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Thousand and One Goals Z ARATHUSTRA has seen many lands and many peoples: thus he has discovered the good and evil of many peoples.  Zarathustra has found no greater power on earth than good and evil.  No people could live without evaluating; but if it wishes to maintain itself it must not evaluate as its neighbour evaluates.  Much that seemed good to one people seemed shame and disgrace to another: thus I found.  I found much that was called evil in one place was in another decked with purple honours.  One neighbour never understood another: his soul was always amazed at his neighbour’s madness and wickedness.  A table of values hangs over every people.  Behold, it is the table of its overcomings; behold, it is the voice of its will to power.  What it accounts hard it calls praiseworthy; what it accounts indispensable and hard it calls good; and that which relieves the greatest need, the rare, the hardest of all – it glorifies as holy.  Whatever causes it to rule and conquer and glitter, to the dread and envy of its neighbour, that it accounts the sublimest, the paramount, the evaluation and the meaning of all things.  Truly, my brother, if you only knew a people’s need and land and sky and neighbour, you could surely divine the law of its overcomings, and why it is upon this ladder that it mounts towards its hope.  ‘You should always be the first and outrival all others: your jealous soul should love no one, except your friend’ -this precept made the soul of a Greek tremble: in following it he followed his path to greatness.  ‘To speak the truth and to know well how to handle bow and arrow’ – this seemed both estimable and hard to that people from whom! got my name – a name which is both estimable and hard to me.  10 ‘To honour father and mother and to do their will even from the roots of the soul’: another people hung this table of overcoming over itself and became mighty and eternal with it.  ‘To practise loyalty and for the sake of loyalty to risk honour and blood even in evil and dangerous causes’: another people mastered itself with such teaching, and thus mastering itself it became pregnant and heavy with great hopes.  Truly, men have given themselves all their good and evil.  Truly, they did not take it, they did not find it, it did not descend to them as a voice from heaven.  Man first implanted values into things to maintain himself – he created the meaning of things, a human meaning! Therefore he calls himself: ‘Man’, that is: the evaluator.  Evaluation is creation: hear it, you creative men! Valuating is itself the value and jewel of all valued things.  Only through evaluation is there value: and without evaluation the nut of existence would be hollow.  Hear it, you creative men! A change in values – that means a change in the creators of values.  He who has to be a creator always has to destroy.  Peoples were the creators at first; only later were individuals creators.  Indeed, the individual himself is still the latest creation.  Once the peoples hung a table of values over themselves.  The love that wants to rule and the love that wants to obey created together such tables as these.  Joy in the herd is older than joy in the Ego: and as long as the good conscience is called herd, only the bad conscience says: I.  Truly, the cunning, loveless Ego, that seeks its advantage in the advantage of many – that is not the origin of the herd, but the herd’s destruction.  It has always been creators and loving men who created good and evil.  Fire of love and fire of anger glow in the names of all virtues.  Zarathustra has seen many lands and many peoples: Zarathustra has found no greater power on earth than the works of these loving men: these works are named ‘good’ and’ evil’.  Truly, the power of this praising and blaming is a monster.  Tell me, who will subdue it for me, brothers? Tell me, who will fasten fetters upon the thousand necks of this beast? Hitherto there have been a thousand goals, for there have been a thousand peoples.  Only fetters are still lacking for these thousand necks, the one goal is still lacking.  Yet tell me, my brothers: if a goal for humanity is still lacking, is there not still lacking – humanity itself? Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Retired from Service N OT long after Zarathustra had freed himself from the sorcerer, however, he again saw someone sitting beside the path he was going: a tall, dark man with a pale, haggard face; this man greatly vexed him.  ‘Alas,’ he said to his heart,’ there sits disguised affliction, he seems to be of the priestly sort: what do they want in my kingdom? ‘What! I have hardly escaped from that sorcerer: must another magician cross my path, ‘some wizard who operates by laying on hands, some gloomy miracle-worker by the grace of God, some anointed world-slanderer: may the Devil take him! ‘But the Devil is never in his proper place: he always comes too late, that confounded dwarf and club-foot!’ Thus cursed Zarathustra impatiently in his heart and considered how, with averted gaze, he might slip past the dark man: but behold, it turned out differently.  For at the same moment the sitting man had already seen him; and not unlike someone whom an unexpected happiness has befallen, he jumped up and went towards Zarathustra.  ‘Whoever you may be, traveller,’ he said, ‘help one who has gone astray, a seeker, an old man who may easily come to harm here! ‘The world here is strange and remote to me, and I hear the howling of wild animals; and he who could have afforded me protection is himself no more.  ‘I was seeking the last pious man, a saint and hermit who, alone in his forest, had as yet heard nothing of what all the world knows today.’ ‘What does all the world know today?’ asked Zarathustra.  ‘This, perhaps: that the old God in whom all the world once believed no longer lives?’ ‘That is so,’ answered the old man sadly.  ‘And I served that old God until his last hour.  ‘Now, however, I am retired from service, without master, and yet I am not free, neither am I merry even for an hour, except in memories.  ‘That is why I climbed into these mountains, that I might at last celebrate a festival once more, as becomes an old pope and church-father: for know, I am the last pope! – a festival of pious memories and divine services.  ‘But now he himself is dead, the most pious of men, that saint in the forest who used continually to praise his God with singing and muttering.  ‘When I found his hut I no longer found him himself, but I did find two wolves in it, howling over his death – for all animals loved him.  Then I hurried away.  ‘Had I come into these forests and mountains in vain? Then my heart decided to seek another, the most pious of all those who do not believe in God – to seek Zarathustra!’ Thus spoke the old man and gazed with penetrating eyes at him who stood before him; Zarathustra, however, took the old pope’s hand and for a long time regarded it admiringly.  ‘Behold, venerable man.’ he said then, ‘what a long and beautiful hand! It is the hand of one who has always distributed blessings.  But now it holds fast him you seek, me, Zarathustra.  ‘It is I, the godless Zarathustra, the same who says: Who is more godless than I, that I may rejoice in his teaching?’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and pierced with his glance the thoughts and reservations of the old pope.  At last the latter began: ‘He who loved and possessed him most, he has now lost him the most also: ‘behold, am I myself not the more godless of us two now? But who could rejoice in that!’ ‘You served him to the last,’ asked Zarathustra thoughtfully, after a profound silence, ‘do you know how he died? Is it true what they say, that pity choked him, ‘that he saw how man hung on the Gross and could not endure it, that love for man became his Hell and at last his death?’ The old pope, however, did not answer, but looked away shyly and with a pained and gloomy expression.  ‘Let him go,’ said Zarathustra after prolonged reflection, during which he continued to gaze straight in the old man’s eye.  ‘Let him go, he is finished.  And although it honours you that you speak only good of this dead god, yet you know as well as I who he was; and that he followed strange paths.’ ‘Between ourselves,’ said the old pope, becoming cheerful, ‘or, as I may say, spoken beneath three eyes’ 44 (for he was blind in one eye) ‘in divine matters I am more enlightened than Zarathustra himself – and may well be so.  ‘My love served him long years, my will obeyed all his will.  A good servant, however, knows everything, and many things, too, that his master hides from himself.  ‘He was a hidden god, full of secrecy.  Truly, he even came by a son through no other than secret and indirect means.  At the door of faith in him stands adultery.  ‘Whoever honours him as a god of love does not think highly enough of love itself.  Did this god not also want to be judge? But the lover loves beyond reward and punishment.  ‘When he was young, this god from the orient, he was hard and revengeful and built himself a Hell for the delight of his favourites.  ‘But at length he grew old and soft and mellow and compassionate, more like a grandfather than a father, most like a tottery old grandmother.  ‘Then he sat, shrivelled, in his chimney corner, fretting over his weak legs, world-weary, weary of willing, and one day suffocated through his excessive pity.’ ‘Old pope,’ Zarathustra interposed at this point, ‘did you see that with your own eyes? It certainly could have happened like that: like that, and also otherwise.  When gods die, they always die many kinds of death.  ‘But very well! One way or the other, one way and the other – he is gone! He offended the taste of my ears and eyes, I will say no worse of him.  ‘I love everything that is clear-eyed and honest of speech.  But he – you must know it, old priest, there was something of your nature about him, something of the priestly nature – he was ambiguous.  ‘He was also indistinct.  How angry he was with us, this shorter of wrath, because we mistook his meaning! But why did he not speak more clearly? ‘And if our ears were to blame, why did he give us ears that were unable to hear him properly? If there was dirt in our ears, very well! who put it there? ‘He had too many failures, this potter who had not learned his craft I But that he took vengeance on his pots and creations because they had turned out badly – that was a sin against good taste .  ‘There is also good taste in piety: that said at last: Away with such a god! Better no god, better to produce destiny on one’s own account, better to be a fool, better to be God oneself!’ ‘What do I hear!’ the old pope said at this point, pricking up his ears; ‘O Zarathustra, you are more pious than you believe, with such an unbelief! Some god in you has converted you to your godlessness.  ‘Is it not your piety itself that no longer allows you to believe in a god? And your exceeding honesty will yet carry you off beyond good and evil, too! ‘For behold, what has been reserved for you? You have eyes and hand and mouth destined for blessing from eternity.  One does not bless with the hand alone.  ‘In your neighbourhood, although you would be the most godless, I scent a stealthy odour of holiness and well-being that comes from long benedictions: it fills me with joy and sorrow.  ‘Let me be your guest, O Zarathustra, for a single night! Nowhere on earth shall I be happier now than with you!’ ‘Amen! So shall it be!’ said Zarathustra in great astonishment, ‘up yonder leads the way, there lies Zarathustra’s cave.  ‘Indeed, I would gladly lead you there myself, venerable man, for I love all pious men.  But now a cry of distress calls me hurriedly away from you.  ‘I will have no one come to harm in my domain; my cave is an excellent refuge.  And most of all I should like to set every sad and sorrowful person again on firm land and firm legs.  ‘Who, however, could lift your melancholy from your shoulders? I am too weak for that.  Truly, we should have to wait a long time before someone reawakened your god for you.  ‘For this old god no longer lives: he is quite dead.’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Three Evil Things 1 I N a dream, in my last morning dream, I stood today upon a headland – beyond the world, I held a pair of scales and weighed the world.  Oh, that the dawn came to me too soon! It glowed me into wakefulness, the jealous dawn! It is always jealous of the glow of my morning dreams.  Measurable to him who has time, weighable to a good weigher, accessible to strong pinions, divinable to divine nutcrackers: thus did my dream find the world.  My dream, a bold sailor, half ship half hurricane, silent as a butterfly, impatient as a falcon: how did it have time and patience today for weighing of worlds? Did my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it, my laughing, wakeful day-wisdom that mocks all ‘infinite worlds’? For my wisdom says: ‘Where power is, there number becomes master: it has more power.’ How confidently did my dream gaze upon this finite world, eager neither for new things nor for old; neither in awe nor in supplication – as if a round apple presented itself to my hand, a ripe, golden apple with a soft, cool, velvety skin – thus the world presented itself to me – as if a tree nodded to me, a wide-branching, strong-willed tree, bent for reclining and as a footstool for the way-weary: thus the world stood upon my headland – as if tender hands brought me a casket – a casket open for the delight of modest, adoring eyes: thus the world presented himself before me today – not so enigmatic as to frighten away human love, not so explicit as to put to sleep human wisdom – a good, human thing was the world to me today, this world of which so many evil things are said! How grateful I am to my morning dream, that today in the early morning I thus weighed the world! It came to me as a good, human thing, this dream and comforter of the heart! And that I may do the same as it by day and learn and imitate its best aspects, I will now place the three most evil things upon the scales and weigh them well and humanly.  He who taught how to bless also taught how to curse: which are the three most-cursed things in the world? I will place these upon the scales.  Sensual pleasure, lust for power, selfishness : these three have hitherto been cursed the most and held in the worst and most unjust repute – these three will I weigh well and humanly.  Well then! Here is my headland and there is the sea: it rolls towards me, shaggy, fawning, the faithful old hundred-headed canine monster that I love.  Well then! Here I will hold the scales over the rolling sea: and I choose a witness, too, to look on – you, hermit tree, you heavy-odoured, broad-arched tree that I love! Upon what bridge does the present go over to the hereafter? What compulsion compels the high to bend to the low? And what bids even the highest – to grow higher still? Now the scales stand level and still: I have thrown in three weighty questions, the other scale bears three weighty answers.  2 Sensual pleasure: goad and stake to all hair-shirted despisers of the body and anathematized as ‘the world’ by all afterworldsmen: for it mocks and makes fools of all teachers of confusion and error.  Sensual pleasure: to the rabble the slow fire over which they are roasted; to all worm-eaten wood, to all stinking tatters, the ever-ready stewing-oven of lust.  Sensual pleasure: innocent and free to free hearts, the earth’s garden-joy, an overflowing of thanks to the present from all the future.  Sensual pleasure: a sweet poison only to the withered, but to the lion-willed the great restorative and reverently-preserved wine of wines.  Sensual pleasure: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness and highest hope.  For marriage is promised to many, and more than marriage – to many that are stranger to one another than man and woman: and who has fully conceived how strange man and woman are to one another! Sensual pleasure – but I will fence my thoughts round, and my words too: so that swine and hot fanatics shall not break into my garden! Lust for power: the scourge of fire of the hardest-hearted; the cruel torment reserved by the cruellest for himself; the dark flame of living bonfires.  Lust for power: the wicked fly seated upon the vainest peoples; the mocker of all uncertain virtue; which rides upon every horse and every pride.  Lust for power: the earthquake that breaks and bursts open all that is decayed and hollow; the rolling, growling, punitive destroyer of whitewashed sepulches; the flashing question-mark beside premature answers.  Lust for power: before its glance man crawls and bends and toils and becomes lower than the swine or the snake – until at last the cry of the great contempt bursts from him – Lust for power: the fearsome teacher of the great contempt, who preaches in the face of cities and empires ‘Away with you!’ – until at last they themselves cry out ‘Away with me !’ Lust for power: which, however, rises enticingly even to the pure and the solitary and up to self-sufficient heights, glowing like a love that paints purple delights enticingly on earthly heavens.  Lust for power: but who shall call it lust , when the height longs to stoop down after power I Truly, there is no sickness and lust in such a longing and descent! That the lonely height may not always be solitary and sufficient to itself; that the mountain may descend to the valley and the wind of the heights to the lowlands – Oh who shall find the rightful baptismal and virtuous name for such a longing! ‘Bestowing virtue’ – that is the name Zarathustra once gave the unnameable.  And then it also happened – and truly, it happened for the first time! – that his teaching glorified selfishness , the sound, healthy selfishness that issues from a mighty soul – from a mighty soul, to which pertains the exalted body, the beautiful, victorious, refreshing body, around which everything becomes a mirror; the supple, persuasive body, the dancer whose image and epitome is the self-rejoicing soul.  The self-rejoicing of such bodies and souls calls itself: ‘Virtue’.  Such self-rejoicing protects itself with its doctrines of good and bad as with sacred groves; with the names it gives its happiness it banishes from itself all that is contemptible.  It banishes from itself all that is cowardly; it says: Bad – that is to say, cowardly! He who is always worrying, sighing, complaining, and who gleans even the smallest advantage, seems contemptible to it.  It also despises all woeful wisdom: for truly, there is also a wisdom that blossoms in darkness, a night-shade wisdom, which is always sighing: ‘All is vain!’ Timid mistrustfulness seems base to it, as do all who desire oaths instead of looks and hands; and all-too-mistrustful wisdom, for such is the nature of cowardly souls.  It regards as baser yet him who is quick to please, who, dog-like, lies upon his back, the humble man; and there is also a wisdom that is humble and dog-like and pious and quick to please.  Entirely hateful and loathsome to it is he who will never defend himself, who swallows down poisonous spittle and evil looks, the too-patient man who puts up with everything, is content with everything: for that is the nature of slaves.  Whether one be servile before gods and divine kicks, or before men and the silly opinions of men: it spits at skyes of all kinds, this glorious selfishness! Bad: that is what it calls all that is broken-down and niggardly-servile, unclear, blinking eyes, oppressed hearts, and that false, yielding type of man who kisses with broad, cowardly lips.  And sham-wisdom: that is what it calls all wit that slaves and old men and weary men affect; and especially the whole bad, raving, over-clever priest-foolishness! And to ill-use selfishness – precisely that has been virtue and called virtue.  And ‘selfless’ – that is what, with good reason, all these world-weary cowards and Cross-spiders wished to be! But now the day, the transformation, the sword of judgement, the great noontide comes to them all: then many things shall be revealed! And he who declares the Ego healthy and holy and selfishness glorious – truly, he, a prophet, declares too what he knows: ‘Behold, it comes, it is near, the great noontide !’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Virtuous O NE has to speak with thunder and heavenly fireworks to feeble and dormant senses.  But the voice of beauty speaks softly: it steals into only the most awakened souls.  Gently my mirror trembled and laughed to me today; it was beauty’s holy laughter and trembling.  My beauty laughed at you, you virtuous, today.  And thus came its voice to me: ‘They want to be – paid as well!’ You want to be paid as well, you virtuous! Do you want reward for virtue and heaven for earth and eternity for your today? And are you now angry with me because I teach that there is no reward-giver nor paymaster? And truly, I do not even teach that virtue is its own reward.  Alas, this is my sorrow: reward and punishment have been lyingly introduced into the foundation of things – and now even into the foundation of your souls, you virtuous! But my words, like the snout of the boar, shall tear up the foundations of your souls; you shall call me a ploughshare.  All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light; and when you lie, grubbed up and broken, in the sunlight, then your falsehood will be separated from your truth.  For this is your truth: You are too pure for the dirt of the words: revenge, punishment, reward, retribution.  You love your virtue as the mother her child; but when was it heard of a mother wanting to be paid for her love? Your virtue is your dearest self.  The ring’s desire is in you: to attain itself again – every ring struggles and turns itself to that end.  And every work of your virtue is like a star extinguished: its light is for ever travelling – and when will it cease from travelling? Thus the light of your virtue is still travelling even when its task is done.  Though it be forgotten and dead, its beam of light still lives and travels.  That your virtue is your Self and not something alien, a skin, a covering: that is the truth from the bottom of your souls, you virtuous! But there are indeed those to whom virtue is a writhing under the whip: and you have listened too much to their cries! And with others, their vices grow lazy and they call that virtue; and once their hatred and jealousy stretch themselves to rest, their ‘justice’ becomes lively and rubs its sleepy eyes.  And there are others who are drawn downward: their devils draw them.  But the more they sink, the more brightly shines their eye and the longing for their God.  Alas, their cry, too, has come to your ears, you virtuous: ‘What I am not , that, that to me is God and virtue!’ And there are others who go along, heavy and creaking, like carts carrying stones downhill: they speak much of dignity and virtue – their brake they call virtue! And there are others who are like household clocks wound up; they repeat their tick-tock and want people to call tick-tock – virtue.  Truly, I have fun with these: wherever I find such clocks I shall wind them up with my mockery; let them chime as well as tick! And others are proud of their handful of righteousness and for its sake commit wanton outrage upon all things: so that the world is drowned in their unrighteousness.  Alas, how ill the word ‘virtue’ sounds in their mouths! And when they say: ‘I am just,’ it always sounds like: ‘I am revenged!’ 15 They want to scratch out the eyes of their enemies with their virtue; and they raise themselves only in order to lower others.  And again, there are those who sit in their swamp and speak thus from the rushes: ‘Virtue – that means to sit quietly in the swamp.  ‘We bite nobody and avoid him who wants to bite: and in everything we hold the opinion that is given us.’ And again, there are those who like posing and think: Virtue is a sort of pose.  Their knees are always worshipping and their hands are glorifications of virtue, but their heart knows nothing of it.  And again, there are those who hold it a virtue to say: ‘Virtue is necessary’; but fundamentally they believe only that the police are necessary.  And many a one who cannot see the sublime in man calls it virtue that he can see his baseness all-too-closely: thus he calls his evil eye virtue.  And some want to be edified and raised up and call it virtue; and others want to be thrown down – and call it virtue too.  And in that way almost everyone firmly believes he is participating in virtue; and at least asserts he is an expert on ‘good’ and ‘evil’.  But Zarathustra has not come to say to all these liars and fools: ‘What do you know of virtue? What could you know of virtue?’ No, he has come that you, my friends, might grow weary of the old words you have learned from the fools and liars.  That you might grow weary of the words ‘reward’, ‘retribution’, ‘punishment’, ‘righteous revenge’.  That you might grow weary of saying: ‘An action is good when it is unselfish.’ Ah, my friends I That your Self be in the action, as the mother is in the child: let that be your maxim of virtue! Truly, I have taken a hundred maxims and your virtues’ dearest playthings away from you; and you scold me now, as children scold.  They were playing on the sea-shore – then came a wave and swept their playthings into the deep: now they cry.  But the same wave shall bring them new playthings and pour out new coloured sea-shells before them! Thus they will be consoled; and you too, my friends, shall, like them, have your consolations – and new coloured sea-shells! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the New Idol T HERE are still peoples and herds somewhere, but not with us, my brothers: here there are states.  The state? What is that? Well then! Now open your ears, for now I shall speak to you of the death of peoples.  The state is the coldest of all cold monsters.  Coldly it lies, too; and this lie creeps from its mouth: ‘I, the state, am the people.’ It is a lie! It was creators who created peoples and hung a faith and a love over them: thus they served life.  It is destroyers who set snares for many and call it the state: they hang a sword and a hundred desires over them.  Where a people still exists, there the people do not understand the state and hate it as the evil eye and sin against custom and law.  I offer you this sign: every people speaks its own language of good and evil: its neighbour does not understand this language.  It invented this language for itself in custom and law.  But the state lies in all languages of good and evil; and whatever it says, it lies – and whatever it has, it has stolen.  Everything about it is false; it bites with stolen teeth.  Even its belly is false.  Confusion of the language of good and evil; I offer you this sign as the sign of the state.  Truly, this sign indicates the will to death! Truly, it beckons to the preachers of death! Many too many are born: the state was invented for the superfluous! Just see how it lures them, the many-too-many! How it devours them, and chews them, and re-chews them! ‘There is nothing greater on earth than I, the regulating finger of God’ – thus the monster bellows.  And not only the long-eared and short-sighted sink to their knees! Ah, it whispers its dismal lies to you too, you great souls! Ah, it divines the abundant hearts that like to squander themselves! Yes, it divines you too, you conquerors of the old God! You grew weary in battle and now your weariness serves the new idol! It would like to range heroes and honourable men about it, this new idol! It likes to sun itself in the sunshine of good consciences – this cold monster! It will give you everything if you worship it, this new idol: thus it buys for itself the lustre of your virtues and the glance of your proud eyes.  It wants to use you to lure the many-too-many.  Yes, a cunning device of Hell has here been devised, a horse of death jingling with the trappings of divine honours! Yes, a death for many has here been devised that glorifies itself as life: truly, a heart-felt service to all preachers of death! I call it the state where everyone, good and bad, is a poison-drinker: the state where everyone, good and bad, loses himself: the state where universal slow suicide is called – life.  Just look at these superfluous people! They steal for themselves the works of inventors and the treasures of the wise: they call their theft culture – and they turn everything to sickness and calamity.  Just look at these superfluous people! They are always ill, they vomit their bile and call it a newspaper.  They devour one another and cannot even digest themselves.  Just look at these superfluous people! They acquire wealth and make themselves poorer with it.  They desire power and especially the lever of power, plenty of money – these impotent people! See them clamber, these nimble apes! They clamber over one another and so scuffle into the mud and the abyss.  They all strive towards the throne: it is a madness they have – as if happiness sat upon the throne! Often filth sits upon the throne – and often the throne upon filth, too.  They all seem madmen to me and clambering apes and too vehement.  Their idol, that cold monster, smells unpleasant to me: all of them, all these idolaters, smell unpleasant to me.  My brothers, do you then want to suffocate in the fumes of their animal mouths and appetites? Better to break the window and leap into the open air.  Avoid this bad odour! Leave the idolatry of the superfluous! Avoid this bad odour! Leave the smoke of these human sacrifices! The earth still remains free for great souls.  Many places -the odour of tranquil seas blowing about them – are still empty for solitaries and solitary couples.  A free life still remains for great souls.  Truly, he who possesses little is so much the less possessed: praised be a moderate poverty! Only there, where the state ceases, does the man who is not superfluous begin: does the song of the necessary man, the unique and irreplaceable melody, begin.  There, where the state ceases – look there, my brothers.  Do you not see it: the rainbow and the bridges to the Superman? Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra On the Mount of Olives W INTER , an ill guest, sits in my house; my hands are blue from his friendly handshake.  I honour him, this ill guest, but I am glad to let him sit alone.  I gladly run away from him; and if you run well you can escape him! With warm feet and warm thoughts do I run yonder where the wind is still, to the sunny corner of my mount of olives.  There I laugh at my stern guest and am still fond of him, for he drives the flies away and silences many little noises for me at home.  For he will not permit even a gnat to buzz about, far less two gnats; and he makes the streets lonely, so that the moonlight is afraid there at night.  He is a hard guest, but I honour him, and do not pray to a fat-bellied fire-idol, as the weaklings do.  Rather a little chattering of teeth than idol-worship! – so my nature will have it.  And I especially detest all lustful, steaming, musty fire-idols.  Whom I love I love better in winter than in summer; I now mock my enemies better and more heartily, since winter sits in my home.  Heartily, in truth, even when I crawl into bed – even there my hidden happiness laughs and grows wanton; even my deceptive dream laughs.  I, a – crawler? Never in my life have I crawled before the powerful; and if I ever lied, I lied from love.  For that reason I am joyful even in my winter bed.  A meagre bed warms me more than an opulent one, for I am jealous of my poverty.  And it is most faithful to me in the winter.  I start each day with a wickedness, I mock winter with a cold bath: my stern house-companion grumbles at that.  I also like to tickle him with a wax candle: so that he may finally let the sky emerge from an ash-grey dawn.  For I am especially wicked in the morning: at the early hour when the bucket clatters at the well and horses neigh warmly in grey streets.  Then I wait impatiently, until the luminous sky at last dawns for me, the snowy-bearded winter sky, the white-haired, ancient sky – the silent, whiter sky, that often conceals even its sun! Did I learn long, luminous silence from it? Or did it learn it from me? Or did each of us devise it himself? The origin of all good things is thousand fold – all good, wanton things spring for joy into existence: how should they do that – once only? Long silence is also a good, wanton thing, and to gaze like the winter sky from a luminous, round-eyed countenance – like it, to conceal one’s sun and one’s inflexible sun-will: truly, I have learned well this art and this winter wantonness! It is my favourite wickedness and art, that my silence has learned not to betray itself by silence.  Rattling words and dice have I outwitted the solemn attendants: my will and purpose shall elude all the stern watchers.  So that no one might see down into my profundity and ultimate will – that is why I devised my long, luminous silence.  I have found so many shrewd men who veiled their faces and troubled their waters, so that no one might see through them and under them.  But the shrewder distrusters and nut-crackers came straight to them: straightway they fished out their best-hidden fish! But the clear, the honest, the transparent – they seem to me the shrewdest silent men: those whose profundity is so deep that even the clearest water does not – betray it.  You snowy-bearded winter sky, you round-eyed, white-haired sky above me! O you heavenly image of my soul and its wantonness! And do I not have to hide myself, like one who has swallowed gold, so that my soul shall not be slit open? Do I not have to wear stilts, so that they may not notice my long legs – all these envious and injurious people around me? These reeky, cosy, worn-out, mouldy, woebegone souls – how could their envy endure my happiness? So I show them only ice and winter on my peaks – and not that my mountain also winds all the girdles of sunlight around it! They hear only the whistling of my winter storms: and not that I also fare over warm seas, like passionate, heavy, hot south winds.  They even pity my accidents and chances: but my doctrine is: ‘Let chance come to me: it is as innocent as a little child!’ How could they endure my happiness, if I did not put accidents and the miseries of winter and fur-hats and coverings of snow-clouds around my happiness! – if I did not myself pity their pity , the pity of these envious and injurious people! – if I myself did not sigh and let my teeth chatter in their presence, and patiently let myself be wrapped up in their pity! This is the wise wantonness and benevolence of my soul: it does not bide its winter and frosty storms; neither does it hide its chilblains.  For one person, solitude is the escape of an invalid; for another, solitude is escape from the invalids.  Let them bear me chattering and sighing with winter cold, all these poor, squint-eyed knaves around me! With such sighing and chattering have I escaped their heated rooms.  Let them pity me and sigh with me over my chilblains: ‘He will yet freeze to death on the ice of knowledge!’ – so they wail.  In the meanwhile, I run with warm feet hither and thither upon my mount of olives: in the sunny corner of my mount of olives do I sing and mock all pity.  Thus sang Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra PART THREE ‘ You look up when you desire to be exalted.  And I look down, because I am exalted .  ‘ Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted? ‘ He who climbs upon the highest mountains laughs at all tragedies, real or imaginary .  ’ ZARATHUSTRA: ‘ Of Reading and Writing ’ The Wanderer I T was midnight when Zarathustra made his way over the ridge of the island, so that he might arrive at the other shore with the early dawn: for there he meant to board ship.  For there was a good harbour at which foreign ships, too, liked to drop anchor: they took on board many who wanted to leave the Blissful Islands and cross the sea.  Now, as Zarathustra was climbing the mountain he recalled as he went the many lonely wanderings he had made from the time of his youth, and how many mountains and ridges and summits he had already climbed.  I am a wanderer and a mountain-climber (he said to his heart), I do not like the plains and it seems I cannot sit still for long.  And whatever may yet come to me as fate and experience – a wandering and a mountain-climbing will be in it: in the final analysis one experiences only oneself.  The time has passed when accidents could befall me; and what could still come to me that was not already my own? It is returning, at last it is coming home to me – my own Self and those parts of it that have long been abroad and scattered among all things and accidents.  And I know one thing more: I stand now before my last summit and before the deed that has been deferred the longest.  Alas, I have to climb my most difficult path! Alas, I have started upon my loneliest wandering! But a man of my sort does not avoid such an hour: the hour that says to him: ‘Only now do you tread your path of greatness! Summit and abyss – they are now united in one! ‘You are treading your path of greatness: now what was formerly your ultimate danger has become your ultimate refuge! ‘You are treading your path of greatness: now it must call up all your courage that there is no longer a path behind you! ‘You are treading your path of greatness: no one shall steal after you here! Your foot itself has extinguished the path behind you, and above that path stands written: Impossibility.  ‘And when all footholds disappear, you must know how to climb upon your own head: how could you climb upward otherwise? ‘Upon your own head and beyond your own heart! Now the gentlest part of you must become the hardest.  ‘He who has always been very indulgent with himself sickens at last through his own indulgence.  All praise to what makes hard! I do not praise the land where butter and honey – flow! ‘In order to see much one must learn to look away from oneself – every mountain-climber needs this hardness.  ‘But he who, seeking enlightenment, is over-eager with his eyes, how could he see more of a thing than its foreground! ‘You, however, O Zarathustra, have wanted to behold the ground of things and their background: 24 so you must climb above yourself – up and beyond, until you have even your stars under you!’ Yes! To look down upon myself and even upon my stars: that alone would I call my summit , that has remained for me as my ultimate summit! Thus spoke Zarathustra to himself as he climbed, consoling his heart with hard sayings: for his heart was wounded as never before.  And when he arrived at the top of the mountain ridge, behold, there lay the other sea spread out before him: and he stood and was long silent.  But the night at this height was cold and dear and bright with stars.  I know my fate (he said at last with sadness).  Well then! I am ready.  My last solitude has just begun.  Ah, this sorrowful, black sea beneath me! Ah, this brooding reluctance! Ah, destiny and sea! Now I have to go down to you! I stand before my highest mountain and my longest wandering: therefore I must first descend deeper than I have ever descended, – deeper into pain than I have ever descended, down to its blackest stream! So my destiny will have it.  Well then! I am ready.  Whence arise the highest mountains? I once asked.  Then I learned that they arise from the sea.  This testimony is written into their stones and into the sides of their summits.  The highest must arise to its height from the deepest.  Thus spoke Zarathustra on the mountain summit, where it was cold; when he drew near to the sea, however, and at length stood alone beneath the cliffs, he had grown weary on the way and more yearning than he was before.  Everything is still asleep (he said); even the sea is asleep.  Its eye looks at me drowsily and strangely.  But it breathes warmly; I feel it.  And I feel, too, that it is dreaming.  Dreaming, it writhes upon a hard pillow.  Listen! Listen! How it groans with wicked memories! Or with wicked expectations? Ah, I am sad with you, dark monster, and angry even with myself for your sake.  Alas, that my hand has insufficient strength! In truth, I should dearly like to release you from your bad dreams! And as Zarathustra thus spoke, he laughed at himself with melancholy and bitterness.  What, Zarathustra! he said, do you want to sing consolation even to the sea? Ah, you fond fool, Zarathustra, too eager to trust! But that is what you have always been: you have always approached trustfully all that is fearful.  You have always wanted to caress every monster.  A touch of warm breath, a little soft fur on its paw – and at once you have been ready to love and entice it.  Love is the danger for the most solitary man, love of any thing if only it is alive! Indeed, my foolishness and modesty in love is laughable! Thus spoke Zarathustra and laughed again: but then he thought of the friends he had left, and he was angry with himself because of his thoughts, as if he had injured his friends with them.  And forthwith the laughing man wept – for anger and longing did Zarathustra weep bitterly.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra CONTENTS CHRONOLOGY INTRODUCTION FURTHER READING Part One ZARATHUSTRA’S PROLOGUE ZARATHUSTRA’S DISCOURSES Of the Three Metamorphoses Of the Chairs of Virtue Of the Afterworldsmen Of the Despisers of the Body Of Joys and Passions Of the Pale Criminal Of Reading and Writing Of the Tree on the Mountainside Of the Preachers of Death Of War and Warriors Of the New Idol Of the Flies of the Market-Place Of Chastity Of the Friend Of the Thousand and One Goals Of Lave of One’s Neighbour Of the Way of the Creator Of Old and Young Women Of the Adder’ Bite Of Marriage and Children Of Voluntary Death Of the Bestowing Virtue Part Two The Child with the Mirror On the Blissful Islands Of the Compassionate Of the Priests Of the Virtuous Of the Rabble Of the Tarantulas Of the Famous Philosophers The Night Song The Dark Song The Funeral Song Of Self-Overcoming Of the Sublime Men Of the Land of Culture Of Immaculate Perception Of Scholars Of Poets Of Great Events The Prophet Of Redemption Of Manly Prudence The Stillest Hour Part Three The Wanderer Of the Vision and the Riddle Of Involuntary Bliss Before Sunrise Of the Virtue that Makes Small On the Mount of Olives Of Passing By Of the Apostates The Home-Coming Of the Three Evil Things Of the Spirit of Gravity Of Old and New Law – Tables The Convalescent Of the Great Longing The Second Dance Song The Seven Seals (or: The Song of Yes and Amen) Part Four The Honey Offering The Cry of Distress Conversation with the Kings The Leech The Sorcerer Retired from Service The Ugliest Man The Voluntary Beggar The Shadow At Noontide The Greeting The Last Supper Of the Higher Man The Song of Melancholy Of Science Among the Daughters of the Desert The Awakening The Ass Festival The Intoxicated Song The Sign NOTES Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Despisers of the Body I WISH to speak to the despisers of the body.  Let them not learn differently nor teach differently, but only bid farewell to their own bodies – and so become dumb.  ‘I am body and soul’ – so speaks the child.  And why should one not speak like children? But the awakened, the enlightened man says: I am body entirely, and nothing beside; and soul is only a word for something in the body.  The body is a great intelligence, a multiplicity with one sense, a war and a peace, a herd and a herdsman.  Your little intelligence, my brother, which you call ‘spirit’, is also an instrument of your body, a little instrument and toy of your great intelligence.  You say ‘I’ and you are proud of this word.  But greater than this – although you will not believe in it – is your body and its great intelligence, which does not say ‘I’ but performs ‘I’.  What the sense feels, what the spirit perceives, is never an end in itself.  But sense and spirit would like to persuade you that they are the end of all things: they are as vain as that.  Sense and spirit are instruments and toys: behind them still lies the Self.  The Self seeks with the eyes of the sense, it listens too with the ears of the spirit.  The Self is always listening and seeking: it compares, subdues, conquers, destroys.  It rules and is also the Ego’s ruler.  Behind your thoughts and feelings, my brother, stands a mighty commander, an unknown sage – he is called Self.  He lives in your body, he is your body.  There is more reason in your body than in your best wisdom.  And who knows for what purpose your body requires precisely your best wisdom? Your Self laughs at your Ego and its proud leapings.  ‘What are these leapings and flights of thought to me?’ it says to itself.  ‘A by-way to my goal.  I am the Ego’s leading-string and I prompt its conceptions.’ The Self says to the Ego: ‘Feel pain!’ Thereupon it suffers and gives thought how to end its suffering – and it is meant to think for just that purpose.  The Self says to the Ego: ‘Feel joy!’ Thereupon it rejoices and gives thought how it may often rejoice – and it is meant to think for just that purpose.  I want to say a word to the despisers of the body.  It is their esteem that produces this disesteem.  What is it that created esteem and disesteem and value and will? The creative Self created for itself esteem and disesteem, it created for itself joy and sorrow.  The creative body created spirit for itself, as a hand of its will.  Even in your folly and contempt, you despisers of the body, you serve your Self.  I tell you: your Self itself wants to die and turn away from life.  Your Self can no longer perform that act which it most desires to perform: to create beyond itself.  That is what it most wishes to do, that is its whole ardour.  But now it has grown too late for that: so your Self wants to perish, you despisers of the body.  Your Self wants to perish, and that is why you have become despisers of the body! For no longer are you able to create beyond yourselves.  And therefore you are now angry with life and with the earth.  An unconscious envy lies in the sidelong glance of your contempt.  I do not go your way, you despisers of the body! You are not bridges to the Superman! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Immaculate Perception W HEN the moon rose yesterday I thought it was about to give birth to a sun, it lay on the horizon so broad and pregnant.  But it was a liar with its pregnancy; and I will sooner believe in the man in the moon than in the woman.  To be sure, he is not much of a man, either, this timid night-reveller.  Truly, he travels over the roofs with a bad conscience.  For he is lustful and jealous, the monk in the moon, lustful for the earth and for all the joys of lovers.  No, I do not like him, this tomcat on the roofs! All who slink around half-closed windows are repugnant to me! Piously and silently he walks along on star-carpets: but I do not like soft-stepping feet on which not even a spur jingles.  Every honest man’s step speaks out: but the cat steals along over the ground.  Behold, the moon comes along catlike and without honesty.  This parable I speak to you sentimental hypocrites, to you of ‘pure knowledge’! I call you – lustful! You too love the earth and the earthly: I have divined you well! – but shame and bad conscience is in your love – you are like the moon! Your spirit has been persuaded to contempt of the earthly, but your entrails have not: these, however, are the strongest part of you! And now your spirit is ashamed that it must do the will of your entrails and follows by-ways and lying-ways to avoid its own shame.  ‘For me, the highest thing would be to gaze at life without desire and not, as a dog does, with tongue hanging out’ – thus speaks your mendacious spirit to itself: ‘To be happy in gazing, with benumbed will, without the grasping and greed of egotism – cold and ashen in body but with intoxicated moon-eyes! ‘For me, the dearest thing would be to love the earth as the moon loves it, and to touch its beauty with the eyes alone’ -thus the seduced one seduces himself.  ‘And let this be called by me immaculate perception of all things: that I desire nothing of things, except that I may lie down before them like a mirror with a hundred eyes.’ Oh, you sentimental hypocrites, you lustful men! You lack innocence in desire: and therefore you now slander desiring! Truly, you do not love the earth as creators, begetters, men joyful at entering upon a new existence! Where is innocence? Where there is will to begetting.  And for me, he who wants to create beyond himself has the purest will.  Where is beauty? Where I have to will with all my will; where I want to love and perish, that an image may not remain merely an image.  Loving and perishing: these have gone together from eternity.  Will to love: that means to be willing to die, too.  Thus I speak to you cowards! But now your emasculated leering wants to be called ‘contemplation’! And that which lets cowardly eyes touch it shall be christened ‘beautiful’! Oh, you befoulers of noble names! But it shall be your curse, you immaculate men, you of pure knowledge, that you will never bring forth, even if you lie broad and pregnant on the horizon! Truly, you fill your mouths with noble words: and are we supposed to believe that your hearts are overflowing, you habitual liars? But my words are poor, despised, halting words: I am glad to take what falls from the table at your feast.  Yet with them I can still – tell the truth to hypocrites! Yes, my fish-bones, shells, and prickly leaves shall – tickle hypocrites’ noses! There is always bad air around you and around your feasts: for your lustful thoughts, your lies and secrets are in the air! Only dare to believe in yourselves – in yourselves and in your entrails! He who does not believe in himself always lies.  You have put on the mask of a god, you ‘pure’: your dreadful coiling snake has crawled into the mask of a god.  Truly, you are deceivers, you ‘contemplative’! Even Zarathustra was once the fool of your divine veneer; he did not guess at the serpent-coil with which it was filled.  Once I thought I saw a god’s soul at play in your play, you of pure knowledge! Once I thought there was no better art than your arts! Distance concealed from me the serpent-filth, and the evil odour, and that a lizard’s cunning was prowling lustfully around.  But I approached you: then day dawned for me – and now it dawns for you – the moon’s love affair had come to an end! Just look! There it stands, pale and detected – before the dawn! For already it is coming, the glowing sun – its love of the earth is coming! All sun-love is innocence and creative desire! Just look how it comes impatiently over the sea! Do you not feel the thirst and the hot breath of its love? It wants to suck at the sea and drink the sea’s depths up to its height: now the sea’s desire rises with a thousand breasts.  It wants to be kissed and sucked by the sun’s thirst; it wants to become air and height and light’s footpath and light itself! Truly, like the sun do I love life and all deep seas.  And this I call knowledge: all that is deep shall rise up – to my height! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Ass Festival 1 A T this point in the litany, however, Zarathustra could no longer master himself; he cried out ‘Ye-a’ louder even than the ass, and sprang into the midst of his guests gone mad.  ‘But what are you doing, my friends?’ he cried, pulling the worshippers up from the ground.  ‘Woe to you if anyone else but Zarathustra had seen you.  ‘Everyone would adjudge you, with your new faith, to be the worst blasphemers or the most foolish of old women! ‘And you, old pope, how can you reconcile yourself to worshipping an ass as God in this way?’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ answered the pope, ‘forgive me, but in divine matters I am even more enlightened than you.  That stands to reason.  ‘Better to worship God in this shape than in no shape at all! Consider this saying, my exalted friend: you will quickly see that there is wisdom in such a saying.  ‘He who said “God is a spirit” took the biggest step and leap towards unbelief yet taken on earth: such a saying is not easily corrected! ‘My old heart leaps and bounds to know that there is something left on earth to worship.  Forgive a pious old pope’s heart that, O Zarathustra!’ ‘And you,’ said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow, ‘you call and think yourself a free spirit? And do you carry on here such priestly idolatries? ‘Truly, you behave here even worse than you did with your wicken brown maidens, you evil new believer!’ ‘It is bad enough,’ answered the wanderer and shadow, ‘you are right: but what can I do! The old God lives again, O Zarathustra, you may say what you will.  ‘It is all the fault of the ugliest man: he has awakened him again.  And if he says that he once killed him: with gods, death is always only a prejudice.’ ‘And you,’ said Zarathustra, ‘you evil old sorcerer, what were you doing? Who in this free age shall believe in you henceforth, if you believe in such godly asininities? ‘What you did was a stupidity; how could you, prudent man, do anything so stupid!’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ answered the prudent sorcerer, ‘you are right, it was a stupidity, and it was hard enough to do it.’ ‘And even you,’ said Zarathustra to the conscientious man of the spirit, ‘just consider, and lay your finger on your nose! For is there nothing here against your conscience? Is your spirit not too pure for this praying and the exhalations of these devotees?’ ‘There is something in it,’ answered the conscientious man and laid his finger on his nose, ‘there is something in this spectacle which even does my conscience good.  ‘I may not believe in God, perhaps: but it is certain that God seems to me most worthy belief in this form.  ‘God is supposed to be eternal according to the testimony of the most pious: he who has so much time takes his time.  As slow and as stupid as possible: but such a one can in that way go very far, none the less.  ‘And he who has too much spirit might well become infatuated with stupidity and folly.  Consider yourself, O Zarathustra! ‘You yourself – truly I even you could become an ass through abundance and wisdom.  ‘Does a consummate philosopher not like to walk on the most crooked paths? Appearance teaches it, O Zarathustra – your appearance!’ ‘And you yourself, finally,’ said Zarathustra and turned towards the ugliest man, who was still lying on the ground raising his arm up to the ass (for he was giving it wine to drink).  ‘Speak, you unutterable creature, what have you been doing? ‘You seem changed, your eyes are glowing, the mantle of the sublime covers your ugliness: what did you do? ‘Is it true what they say, that you have awakened him again? And why? Was he not with reason killed and done away with? ‘You yourself seem awakened: what did you do? Why did you reform? Why were you converted? Speak, you unutterable creature!’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ answered the ugliest man, ‘you are a rogue.  ‘Whether he still lives or lives again or is truly dead, which of us two knows that best? I ask you.  ‘But one thing I know -1 once learned it from you yourself, O Zarathustra: He who wants to kill most thoroughly – laughs .  ‘“One kills, not by anger but by laughter” – that is what you once said.  O Zarathustra, you obscure man, you destroyer without anger, you dangerous saint, you are a rogue!’ 2 Then, however, Zarathustra, amazed at such purely roguish answers, leaped back to the door of his cave and, turning towards all his guests, cried in a loud voice: ‘O all you clowns, you buffoons! Why do you pretend and dissemble before me! ‘How the heart of each of you writhed with joy and mischievousness, because you had at last again become as little children, that is, pious, ‘because you at last again behaved as children do, that is, prayed, clasped your hands and said “Dear God”! ‘But now leave this nursery, my own cave, where today every kind of childishness is at home.  Come out here and cool your hot childish wantonness and the clamour of your hearts! ‘To be sure: except you become as little children you shall not enter into this kingdom of heaven.’ (And Zarathustra pointed upwards with his hands.) ‘But we certainly do not want to enter into the kingdom of heaven: we have become men, so we want the kingdom of earth ’ 3 And Zarathustra began to speak once more.  ‘O my new friends,’ he said, ‘you strange men, you Higher Men, how well you please me now, ‘since you have become joyful again I Truly, you have all blossomed forth: for such flowers as you, I think, new festivals are needed.  ‘a little brave nonsense, some divine service and ass festival, some joyful old Zarathustra-fool, a blustering wind to blow your souls bright.  ‘Do not forget this night and this ass festival, you Higher Men! You devised that at my home, I take that as a good omen – only convalescents devise such things! ‘And if you celebrate it again, this ass festival, do it for love of yourselves, do it also for love of me! And in remembrance of me !’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra PART FOUR Alas, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the compassionate? And what in the world has caused more suffering than the follies of the compassionate? Woe to all lovers who cannot surmount pity ! Thus spoke the Devil to me once: Even God has bis Hell: it is bis love for man .  And I lately beard him say these words: God is dead; God has died of bit pity for man .  ZARATHUSTRA: ‘ Of the Compassionate ’ The Honey Offering A ND again months and years passed over Zarathustra’s soul, and he did not heed it; his hair, however, grew white.  One day, as he was sitting upon a stone before his cave and gazing silently out – but the outlook there is of the sea and tortuous abysses – his animals went thoughtfully around him and at last placed themselves in front of him.  ‘O Zarathustra,’ they said, ‘are you perhaps looking out for your happiness?’ – ‘Of what account is happiness?’ he answered.  ‘For long I have not aspired after happiness, I aspire after my work.’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ said the animals then, ‘you say that as one who has too many good things.  Do you not lie in a sky-blue lake of happiness?’ ‘You buffoons,’ answered Zarathustra and smiled, ‘how well you chose that image! But you know too that my happiness is heavy and not like a liquid wave: it oppresses me and will not leave me, and behaves like molten pitch.’ Then his animals again went thoughtfully around him and placed themselves once more in front of him.  ‘O Zarathustra,’ they said, ‘is that why you yourself are growing ever darker and more sallow, although your hair looks white and flaxen? Behold, you are sitting in your pitch!’ ‘What are you saying, my animals?’ said Zarathustra laughing.  ‘Truly, I spoke slander when I spoke of pitch.  What is happening to me happens to all fruits that grow ripe.  It is the honey in my veins that makes my blood thicker, and my soul quieter.’ ‘It will be so, O Zarathustra,’ answered the animals and pressed towards him; ‘but would you not like to climb a high mountain today? The air is clear, and today one can see more of the world than ever.’ ‘Yes, my animals,’ he answered, ‘your advice is admirable and after my own inclination: today I will climb a high mountain! But take care that I have honey ready to hand there, yellow, white, fine, ice-cool golden honey in the comb.  For I intend to offer the honey offering.’ But when Zarathustra had reached the summit he sent home the animals which had accompanied him, and found that he was now alone: then he laughed with his whole heart, looked around him and spoke thus: That I spoke of offerings and honey offerings was merely a ruse and, truly, a useful piece of folly! Up here I can speak more freely than before hermits’ caves and hermits’ pets.  Offer – what? I squander what is given me, I, a squanderer with a thousand hands: how could I call that – an offering! And when I desired honey, I desired only bait and sweet syrup and gum, which even grumbling bears and strange, sullen, wicked birds are greedy for: the finest bait, such as huntsmen and fishermen need.  For although the world is like a dark animal-jungle and a pleasure-ground for all wild huntsmen, it seems to me to be rather and preferably an unfathomable, rich sea, a sea full of many-coloured fishes and crabs for which even the gods might long and become fishers and casters of nets: so rich is the world in strange things, great and small! Especially the human world, the human sea: now I cast my golden fishing-rod into it and say: Open up, human abyss! Open up and throw me your fishes and glistening crabs! With my finest bait shall I bait today the strangest human fish! My happiness itself shall I cast far and wide, between sunrise, noontide, and sunset, to see if many human fishes will not learn to kick and tug at my happiness, until they, biting on my sharp, hidden hooks, have to come up to my height, the most multicoloured groundlings of the abyss to the most wicked of all fishers of men.  For I am he , from the heart and from the beginning, drawing, drawing towards me, drawing up to me, raising up, a drawer, trainer, and taskmaker who once bade himself, and not in vain: ‘Become what you are!’ Thus men may now come up to me: for I am still waiting for the signs that it is time for my descent; as yet I do not myself go down, as I must, among men.  Therefore I wait here, cunning and scornful upon high mountains, not impatient, not patient, on the contrary one who has unlearned even patience, because he no longer ‘suffers in patience’.  41 For my destiny is allowing me time: has it forgotten me? Or is it sitting in the shadows behind a great stone catching flies? And truly, I am grateful to my eternal destiny for not hunting and harrying me and for allowing me time for buffooneries and mischief: so that today I have climbed this high mountain to catch fish.  Has a man ever caught fish on a high mountain? And if what I want and do up here is a stupidity, better to do it than to become solemn and green and sallow by waiting down there, to become by waiting a pompous shorter of wrath, a holy howling storm from the mountains, an impatient man crying down into the valleys: ‘Listen, or I shall lash you with the scourge of God!’ Not that I should be angry with such wrathful men on that account! They are good enough for a laugh! How impatient they must be, these great alarm-drums that must find a voice today or never! But I and my destiny – we do not speak to Today, neither do we speak to the Never: we have patience and time and more than time.  For it must come one day and may not pass by.  What must come one day and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, our great, far-off empire of man, the thousand-year empire of Zarathustra.  How far off may that ‘far off’ be? What do I care! But I am not less certain of it on that account – I stand securely with both feet upon this foundation, upon this eternal foundation, upon hard, primordial rock, upon this highest, hardest primordial hill to which all the winds come as to the dividing-place of storms, asking Where? and Whence? and Whither? Here laugh, laugh my bright and wholesome wickedness! Down from high mountains cast your glistening, mocking laughter.  With your glistening bait for me the fairest human fish! And what belongs to me in all seas, my in-and-for-me in all things – fish it out for me, bring it here to me: I wait for it, I the wickedest of all fishermen.  Away, away my hook! In, down, bait for my happiness! Drop down your sweetest dew, honey of my heart! Bite, my hook, into the belly of all black affliction! Gaze out, gaze out, my eye! Oh how many seas round about me, what dawning human futures! And above me – what rosy stillness! What cloudless silence! Thus Spoke Zarathustra * I owe this insight to Mr Marvin Rintala, who in his review of my biography of Nietzsche in The Review of Polities , January 1969, said I had failed to understand in what the essence of Lutheran Pietism consisted, which was true, and then went on to expound it.  ‘The great petition of the Lord’s Prayer,’ says Mr Rintala, ‘is for Pietists: “Thy will be done”’.  This is so much in line with the Christian origin of the conceptions of Zarathustra that I ought to have guessed it even if I did not know it.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Marriage and Children I HAVE a question for you alone, my brother: I throw this question like a plummet into your soul, to discover how deep it is.  You are young and desire marriage and children.  But I ask you: are you a man who ought to desire a child? Are you the victor, the self-conqueror, the ruler of your senses, the lord of your virtues? Thus I ask you.  Or do the animal and necessity speak from your desire? Or isolation? Or disharmony with yourself? I would have your victory and your freedom long for a child.  You should build living memorials to your victory and your liberation.  You should build beyond yourself.  But first you must be built yourself, square-built in body and soul.  You should propagate yourself not only forward, but upward! 13 May the garden of marriage help you to do it! You should create a higher body, a first motion, a self-propelling wheel – you should create a creator.  Marriage: that I call the will of two to create the one who is more than those who created it.  Reverence before one another, as before the willers of such a will – that I call marriage.  Let this be the meaning and the truth of your marriage.  But that which the many-too-many, the superfluous, call marriage – ah, what shall I call it? Ah, this poverty of soul in partnership! Ah, this filth of soul in partnership! Ah, this miserable ease in partnership! All this they call marriage; and they say their marriages are made in Heaven.  Well, I do not like it, this Heaven of the superfluous! No, I do not like them, these animals caught in the heavenly net! And let the God who limps hither to bless what he has not joined stay far from me! Do not laugh at such marriages! What child has not had reason to weep over its parents? This man seemed to me worthy and ripe for the meaning of the earth: but when I saw his wife the earth seemed to me a house for the nonsensical.  Yes, I wish that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and a goose mate together.  This man set forth like a hero in quest of truth and at last he captured a little dressed-up lie.  He calls it his marriage.  That man used to be reserved in his dealings and fastidious in his choice.  But all at once he spoilt his company once and for all: he calls it his marriage.  That man sought a handmaiden with the virtues of an angel.  But all at once he became the handmaiden of a woman, and now he needs to become an angel too.  I have found all buyers cautious, and all of them have astute eyes.  But even the most astute man buys his wife while she is still wrapped.  Many brief follies – that is called love with you.  And your marriage makes an end of many brief follies with one long stupidity.  Your love for woman and woman’s love for man: ah, if only it were pity for suffering and veiled gods! But generally two animals sense one another.  But even your best love too is only a passionate impersonation and a painful ardour.  It is a torch which should light your way to higher paths.  One day you shall love beyond yourselves! So first learn to love! For that you have had to drink the bitter cup of your love.  There is bitterness in the cup of even the best love: thus it arouses longing for the Superman, thus it arouses thirst in you, the creator! A creator’s thirst, arrow, and longing for the Superman: speak, my brother, is this your will to marriage? I call holy such a will and such a marriage.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra PART ONE ZARATHUSTRA’S PROLOGUE 1 W HEN Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and the lake of his home and went into the mountains.  Here he had the enjoyment of his spirit and his solitude and he did not weary of it for ten years.  But at last his heart turned – and one morning he rose with the dawn, stepped before the sun, and spoke to it thus: Great star! What would your happiness be, if you had not those for whom you shine! You have come up here to my cave for ten years: you would have grown weary of your light and of this journey, without me, my eagle and my serpent.  But we waited for you every morning, took from you your superfluity and blessed you for it.  Behold! I am weary of my wisdom, like a bee that has gathered too much honey; I need hands outstretched to take it.  I should like to give it away and distribute it, until the wise among men have again become happy in their folly and the poor happy in their wealth.  To that end, I must descend into the depths: as you do at evening, when you go behind the sea and bring light to the underworld too, superabundant star! Like you, I must go down 1 – as men, to whom I want to descend, call it.  So bless me then, tranquil eye, that can behold without envy even an excessive happiness! Bless the cup that wants to overflow, that the waters may flow golden from him and bear the reflection of your joy over all the world! Behold! This cup wants to be empty again, and Zarathustra wants to be man again.  Thus began Zarathustra’s down-going.  2 Zarathustra went down the mountain alone, and no one met him.  But when he entered the forest, an old man, who had left his holy hut to look for roots in the forest, suddenly stood before him.  And the old man spoke thus to Zarathustra: ‘This wanderer is no stranger to me: he passed by here many years ago.  He was called Zarathustra; but he has changed.  ‘Then you carried your ashes to the mountains: will you today carry your fire into the valleys? Do you not fear an incendiary’s punishment? ‘Yes, I recognize Zarathustra.  His eyes are clear, and no disgust lurks about his mouth.  Does he not go along like a dancer? ‘How changed Zarathustra is! Zarathustra has become – a child, an awakened-one: what do you want now with the sleepers? ‘You lived in solitude as in the sea, and the sea bore you.  Alas, do you want to go ashore? Alas, do you want again to drag your body yourself?’ Zarathustra answered: ‘I love mankind.’ ‘Why’, said the saint, ‘did I go into the forest and the desert? Was it not because I loved mankind all too much? ‘Now I love God: mankind I do not love.  Man is too imperfect a thing for me.  Love of mankind would destroy me.’ Zarathustra answered: ‘What did I say of love? I am bringing mankind a gift.’ ‘Give them nothing,’ said the saint.  ‘Rather take something off them and bear it with them – that will please them best; if only it be pleasing to you! ‘And if you want to give to them, give no more than an alms, and let them beg for that!’ ‘No,’ answered Zarathustra, ‘I give no alms.  I am not poor enough for that.’ The saint laughed at Zarathustra, and spoke thus:’ See to it that they accept your treasures! They are mistrustful of hermits, and do not believe that we come to give.  ‘Our steps ring too lonely through their streets.  And when at night they hear in their beds a man going by long before the sun has risen, they probably ask themselves: Where is that thief going? ‘Do not go to men, but stay in the forest! Go rather to the animals! Why will you not be as I am – a bear among bears, a bird among birds?’ ‘And what does the saint do in the forest?’ asked Zarathustra.  The saint answered: ‘I make songs and sing them, and when I make songs, I laugh, weep, and mutter: thus I praise God.  ‘With singing, weeping, laughing, and muttering I praise the God who is my God.  But what do you bring us as a gift?’ When Zarathustra heard these words, he saluted the saint and said: ‘What should I have to give you! But let me go quickly, that I may take nothing from you!’ And thus they parted from one another, the old man and Zarathustra, laughing as two boys laugh.  But when Zarathustra was alone, he spoke thus to his heart: ‘Could it be possible! This old saint has not yet heard in his forest that God is dead !’ 3 When Zarathustra arrived at the nearest of the towns lying against the forest, he found in that very place many people assembled in the market square: for it had been announced that a tight-rope walker would be appearing.  And Zarathustra spoke thus to the people: I teach you the Superman .  Man is something that should be overcome.  What have you done to overcome him? All creatures hitherto have created something beyond themselves: and do you want to be the ebb of this great tide, and return to the animals rather than overcome man? What is the ape to men? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment.  And just so shall man be to the Superman: a laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment.  You have made your way from worm to man, and much in you is still worm.  Once you were apes, and even now man is more of an ape than any ape.  But he who is the wisest among you, he also is only a discord and hybrid of plant and of ghost.  But do I bid you become ghosts or plants? Behold, I teach you the Superman.  The Superman is the meaning of the earth.  Let your will say: The Superman shall be the meaning of the earth! I entreat you, my brothers, remain true to the earth , and do not believe those who speak to you of superterrestrial hopes! They are poisoners, whether they know it or not.  They are despisers of life, atrophying and self-poisoned men, of whom the earth is weary: so let them be gone! Once blasphemy against God was the greatest blasphemy, but God died, and thereupon these blasphemers died too.  To blaspheme the earth is now the most dreadful offence, and to esteem the bowels of the Inscrutable more highly than the meaning of the earth.  Once the soul looked contemptuously upon the body: and then this contempt was the supreme good – the soul wanted the body lean, monstrous, famished.  So the soul thought to escape from the body and from the earth.  Oh, this soul was itself lean, monstrous, and famished: and cruelty was the delight of this soul! But tell me, my brothers: What does your body say about your soul? Is your soul not poverty and dirt and a miserable ease? In truth, man is a polluted river.  One must be a sea, to receive a polluted river and not be defiled.  Behold, I teach you the Superman: he is this sea, in him your great contempt can go under.  What is the greatest thing you can experience? It is the hour of the great contempt.  The hour in which even your happiness grows loathsome to you, and your reason and your virtue also.  The hour when you say: ‘What good is my happiness? It is poverty and dirt and a miserable ease.  But my happiness should justify existence itself!’ The hour when you say: ‘What good is my reason? Does it long for knowledge as the lion for its food? It is poverty and dirt and a miserable ease!’ The hour when you say: ‘What good is my virtue? It has not yet driven me mad! How tired I am of my good and my evil! It is all poverty and dirt and a miserable ease!’ The hour when you say: ‘What good is my justice? I do not see that I am fire and hot coals.  But the just man is fire and hot coals!’ The hour when you say: ‘What good is my pity? Is not pity the cross upon which he who loves man is nailed? But my pity is no crucifixion!’ Have you ever spoken thus? Have you ever cried thus? Ah, that I had heard you crying thus! It is not your sin, but your moderation that cries to heaven, your very meanness in sinning cries to heaven! Where is the lightning to lick you with its tongue? Where is the madness, with which you should be cleansed? Behold, I teach you the Superman: he is this lightning, he is this madness! When Zarathustra had spoken thus, one of the people cried: ‘Now we have heard enough of the tight-rope walker; let us see him, too!’ And all the people laughed at Zarathustra.  But the tight-rope walker, who thought that the words applied to him, set to work.  4 But Zarathustra looked at the people and marvelled.  Then he spoke thus: Man is a rope, fastened between animal and Superman – a rope over an abyss.  A dangerous going-across, a dangerous wayfaring, a dangerous looking-back, a dangerous shuddering and staying-still.  What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal; what can be loved in man is that he is a going-across and a down-going .  2 I love those who do not know how to live except their lives be a down-going, for they are those who are going across.  I love the great despisers, for they are the great venerators and arrows of longing for the other bank.  I love those who do not first seek beyond the stars for reasons to go down and to be sacrifices: but who sacrifice themselves to the earth, that the earth may one day belong to the Superman.  I love him who lives for knowledge and who wants knowledge that one day the Superman may live.  And thus he wills his own downfall.  I love him who works and invents that he may build a house for the Superman and prepare earth, animals, and plants for him: for thus he wills his own downfall.  I love him who loves his virtue: for virtue is will to downfall and an arrow of longing.  I love him who keeps back no drop of spirit for himself, but wants to be the spirit of his virtue entirely: thus he steps as spirit over the bridge.  I love him who makes a predilection and a fate of his virtue: thus for his virtue’s sake he will live or not live.  I love him who does not want too many virtues.  One virtue is more virtue than two, because it is more of a knot for fate to cling to.  I love him whose soul is lavish, who neither wants nor returns thanks: for he always gives and will not preserve himself.  I love him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favour and who then asks: Am I then a cheat? – for he wants to perish.  I love him who throws golden words in advance of his deeds and always performs more than he promised: for he wills his own downfall.  I love him who justifies the men of the future and redeems the men of the past: for he wants to perish by the men of the present.  I love him who chastises his God because he loves his God: for he must perish by the anger of his God.  I love him whose soul is deep even in its ability to be wounded, and whom even a little thing can destroy: thus he is glad to go over the bridge.  I love him whose soul is overfull, so that he forgets himself and all things are in him: thus all things become his downfall.  I love him who is of a free spirit and a free heart: thus his head is only the bowels of his heart, but his heart drives him to his downfall.  I love all those who are like heavy drops falling singly from the dark cloud that hangs over mankind: they prophesy the coming of the lightning and as prophets they perish.  Behold, I am a prophet of the lightning and a heavy drop from the cloud: but this lightning is called Superman .  5 When Zarathustra had spoken these words he looked again at the people and fell silent.  There they stand (he said to his heart), there they laugh: they do not understand me, I am not the mouth for these ears.  Must one first shatter their ears to teach them to hear with their eyes? Must one rumble like drums and Lenten preachers? Or do they believe only those who stammer? They have something of which they are proud.  What is it called that makes them proud? They call it culture, it distinguishes them from the goatherds.  Therefore they dislike hearing the word ‘contempt’ spoken of them.  So I shall speak to their pride.  So I shall speak to them of the most contemptible man: and that is the Ultimate man .  And thus spoke Zarathustra to the people: It is time for man to fix his goal.  It is time for man to plant the seed of his highest hope.  His soil is still rich enough for it.  But this soil will one day be poor and weak; no longer will a high tree be able to grow from it.  Alas! The time is coming when man will no more shoot the arrow of his longing out over mankind, and the string of his bow will have forgotten how to twang! I tell you: one must have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star.  I tell you: you still have chaos in you.  Alas! The time is coming when man will give birth to no more stars.  Alas! The time of the most contemptible man is coming, the man who can no longer despise himself.  Behold! I shall show you the Ultimate Man , ‘What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?’ thus asks the Ultimate Man and blinks.  The earth has become small, and upon it hops the Ultimate Man, who makes everything small.  His race is as inextermin-able as the flea; the Ultimate Man lives longest.  ‘We have discovered happiness,’ say the Ultimate Men and blink.  They have left the places where living was hard: for one needs warmth.  One still loves one’s neighbour and rubs oneself against him: for one needs warmth.  Sickness and mistrust count as sins with them: one should go about warily.  He is a fool who still stumbles over stones or over men! A little poison now and then: that produces pleasant dreams.  And a lot of poison at last, for a pleasant death.  They still work, for work is entertainment.  But they take care the entertainment does not exhaust them.  Nobody grows rich or poor any more: both are too much of a burden.  Who still wants to rule? Who obey? Both are too much of a burden.  No herdsman and one herd.  Everyone wants the same thing, everyone is the same: whoever thinks otherwise goes voluntarily into the madhouse.  ‘Formerly all the world was mad,’ say the most acute of them and blink.  They are clever and know everything that has ever happened: so there is no end to their mockery.  They still quarrel, but they soon make up – otherwise indigestion would result.  They have their little pleasure for the day and their little pleasure for the night: but they respect health.  ‘We have discovered happiness,’ say the Ultimate Men and blink.  And here ended Zarathustra’s first discourse, which is also called ‘The Prologue’: 3 for at this point the shouting and mirth of the crowd interrupted him.  ‘Give us this Ultimate Man, O Zarathustra’ – so they cried – ‘make us into this Ultimate Man! You can have the Superman!’ And all the people laughed and shouted.  But Zarathustra grew sad and said to his heart: They do not understand me: I am not the mouth for these ears.  Perhaps I lived too long in the mountains, listened too much to the trees and the streams: now I speak to them as to goatherds.  Unmoved is my soul and bright as the mountains in the morning.  But they think me cold and a mocker with fearful jokes.  And now they look at me and laugh: and laughing, they still hate me.  There is ice in their laughter.  6 But then something happened that silenced every mouth and fixed every eye.  In the meantime, of course, the tight-rope walker had begun his work: he had emerged from a little door and was proceeding across the rope, which was stretched between two towers and thus hung over the people and the market square.  Just as he had reached the middle of his course the little door opened again and a brightly-dressed fellow like a buffoon sprang out and followed the former with rapid steps.  ‘Forward, lame-foot!’ cried his fearsome voice, ‘forward sluggard, intruder, pallid-face! Lest I tickle you with my heels! What are you doing here between towers? You belong in the tower, you should be locked up, you are blocking the way of a better man than you!’ And with each word he came nearer and nearer to him: but when he was only a single pace behind him, there occurred the dreadful thing that silenced every mouth and fixed every eye: he emitted a cry like a devil and sprang over the man standing in his path.  But the latter, when he saw his rival thus triumph, lost his head and the rope; he threw away his pole and fell, faster even than it, like a vortex of legs and arms.  The market square and the people were like a sea in a storm: they flew apart in disorder, especially where the body would come crashing down.  But Zarathustra remained still and the body fell quite close to him, badly injured and broken but not yet dead.  After a while, consciousness returned to the shattered man and he saw Zarathustra kneeling beside him.  ‘What are you doing?’ he asked at length.  ‘I’ve known for a long time that the Devil would trip me up.  Now he’s dragging me to Hell: are you trying to prevent him?’ ‘On my honour, friend,’ answered Zarathustra, ‘all you have spoken of does not exist: there is no Devil and no Hell.  Your soul will be dead even before your body: therefore fear nothing any more!’ The man looked up mistrustfully.  ‘If you are speaking the truth,’ he said then, ‘I leave nothing when I leave life.  I am not much more than an animal which has been taught to dance by blows and starvation.’ ‘Not so,’ said Zarathustra.  ‘You have made danger your calling, there is nothing in that to despise.  Now you perish through your calling: so I will bury you with my own hands.’ When Zarathustra had said this the dying man replied no more; but he motioned with his hand, as if he sought Zarathustra’s hand to thank him.  7 In the meanwhile, evening had come and the market square was hidden in darkness: then the people dispersed, for even curiosity and terror grow tired.  But Zarathustra sat on the ground beside the dead man and was sunk in thought: thus he forgot the time.  But at length it became night and a cold wind blew over the solitary figure.  Then Zarathustra arose and said to his heart: Truly, Zarathustra has had a handsome catch today! He caught no man, but he did catch a corpse.  Uncanny is human existence and still without meaning: a buffoon can be fatal to it.  I want to teach men the meaning of their existence: which is the Superman, the lightning from the dark cloud man.  But I am still distant from them, and my meaning does not speak to their minds.  To men, I am still a cross between a fool and a corpse.  Dark is the night, dark are Zarathustra’s ways.  Come, cold and stiff companion! I am going to carry you to the place where I shall bury you with my own hands.  8 When Zarathustra had said this to his heart he loaded the corpse on to his back and set forth.  He had not gone a hundred paces when a man crept up to him and whispered in his ear – and behold! it was the buffoon of the tower who spoke to him.  ‘Go away from this town, O Zarathustra,’ he said.  ‘Too many here hate you.  The good and the just hate you and call you their enemy and despiser; the faithful of the true faith hate you, and they call you a danger to the people.  It was lucky for you that they laughed at you: and truly you spoke like a buffoon.  It was lucky for you that you made company with the dead dog; by so abasing yourself you have saved yourself for today.  But leave this town – or tomorrow I shall jump over you, a living man over a dead one.’ And when he had said this, the man disappeared; Zarathustra, however, went on through the dark streets.  At the town gate the gravediggers accosted him: they shone their torch in his face, recognized Zarathustra and greatly derided him.  ‘Zarathustra is carrying the dead dog away: excellent that Zarathustra has become a gravedigger! For our hands are too clean for this roast.  Does Zarathustra want to rob the Devil of his morsel? Good luck then! A hearty appetite! But if the Devil is a better thief than Zarathustra! – he will steal them both, he will eat them both!’ And they laughed and put their heads together.  Zarathustra said nothing and went his way.  When he had walked for two hours past woods and swamps he had heard too much hungry howling of wolves and he grew hungry himself.  So he stopped at a lonely house in which a light was burning.  ‘Hunger has waylaid me’, said Zarathustra, ‘like a robber.  My hunger has waylaid me in woods and swamps, and in the depth of night.  ‘My hunger has astonishing moods.  Often it comes to me only after mealtimes, and today it did not come at all: where has it been?’ And with that, Zarathustra knocked on the door of the house.  An old man appeared; he carried a light and asked: ‘Who comes here to me and to my uneasy sleep?’ ‘A living man and a dead,’ said Zarathustra.’ Give me food and drink, I forgot about them during the day.  He who feeds the hungry refreshes his own soul: thus speaks wisdom.’ The old man went away, but returned at once and offered Zarathustra bread and wine.  ‘This is a bad country for hungry people,’ he said.  ‘That is why I live here.  Animals and men come here to me, the hermit.  But bid your companion eat and drink, he is wearier than you.’ Zarathustra answered: ‘My companion is dead, I shall hardly be able to persuade him.’ “That is nothing to do with me,’ said the old man morosely.  ‘Whoever knocks at my door must take what I offer him.  Eat, and fare you well!’ After that, Zarathustra walked two hours more and trusted to the road and to the light of the stars: for he was used to walking abroad at night and liked to look into the face of all that slept.  But when morning dawned, Zarathustra found himself in a thick forest and the road disappeared.  Then he laid the dead man in a hollow tree at his head – for he wanted to protect him from the wolves – and laid himself down on the mossy ground.  And straightway he fell asleep, weary in body but with a soul at rest.  9 Zarathustra slept long, and not only the dawn but the morning too passed over his head.  But at length he opened his eyes: in surprise Zarathustra gazed into the forest and the stillness, in surprise he gazed into himself.  Then he arose quickly, like a seafarer who suddenly sees land, and rejoiced: for he beheld a new truth.  And then he spoke to his heart thus: A light has dawned for me: I need companions, living ones, not dead companions and corpses which I carry with me wherever I wish.  But I need living companions who follow me because they want to follow themselves – and who want to go where I want to go.  A light has dawned for me: Zarathustra shall not speak to the people but to companions! Zarathustra shall not be herdsman and dog to the herd! To lure many away from the herd – that is why I have come.  The people and the herd shall be angry with me: the herdsmen shall call Zarathustra a robber.  I say herdsmen, but they call themselves the good and the just.  I say herdsmen: but they call themselves the faithful of the true faith.  Behold the good and the just! Whom do they hate most? Him who smashes their tables of values, the breaker, the lawbreaker 4 – but he is the creator.  Behold the faithful of all faiths! Whom do they hate the most? Him who smashes their tables of values, the breaker, the law-breaker – but he is the creator.  The creator seeks companions, not corpses or herds or believers.  The creator seeks fellow-creators, those who inscribe new values on new tables.  The creator seeks companions and fellow-harvesters: for with him everything is ripe for harvesting.  But he lacks his hundred sickles: so he tears off the ears of corn and is vexed.  The creator seeks companions and such as know how to whet their sickles.  They will be called destroyers and despisers of good and evil.  But they are harvesters and rejoicers.  Zarathustra seeks fellow-creators, fellow-harvesters, and fellow-rejoicers: what has he to do with herds and herdsmen and corpses! And you, my first companion, fare you well! I have buried you well in your hollow tree, I have hidden you well from the wolves.  But I am leaving you, the time has come.  Between dawn and dawn a new truth has come to me.  I will not be herdsman or gravedigger.  I will not speak again to the people: I have spoken to a dead man for the last time.  I will make company with creators, with harvesters, with rejoicers: I will show them the rainbow and the stairway to the Superman.  I shall sing my song to the lone hermit and to the hermits in pairs; and I will make the heart of him who still has ears for unheard-of things heavy with my happiness.  I make for my goal, I go my way; I shall leap over the hesitating and the indolent.  Thus may my going-forward be their going-down! 10 Zarathustra said this to his heart as the sun stood at noon: then he looked inquiringly into the sky – for he heard above him the sharp cry of a bird.  And behold! An eagle was sweeping through the air in wide circles, and from it was hanging a serpent, not like a prey but like a friend: for it was coiled around the eagle’s neck.  ‘It is my animals!’ said Zarathustra and rejoiced in his heart.  ‘The proudest animal under the sun and the wisest animal under the sun’ they have come scouting.  ‘They wanted to learn if Zarathustra was still alive.  Am I in fact alive? ‘I found it more dangerous among men than among animals; Zarathustra is following dangerous paths.  May my animals lead me!’ When Zarathustra had said this he recalled the words of the saint in the forest, sighed, and spoke thus to his heart: ‘I wish I were wise! I wish I were wise from the heart of me, like my serpent! ‘But I am asking the impossible: therefore I ask my pride always to go along with my wisdom! ‘And if one day my wisdom should desert me – ah, it loves to fly away! – then may my pride too fly with my folly!’ Thus began Zarathustra’s down-going.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Prophet –AND I saw a great sadness come over mankind.  The best grew weary of their works.  A teaching went forth, a belief ran beside it: Everything is empty, everything is one, everything is past! And from every hill it resounded: Everything is empty, everything is one, everything is past! We have harvested, it is true: but why did all our fruits turn rotten and brown? What fell from the wicked moon last night? All our work has been in vain, our wine has become poison, an evil eye has scorched our fields and our hearts.  We have all become dry; and if fire fell upon us we should scatter like ashes – yes, we have made weary fire itself.  All our wells have dried up, even the sea has receded.  The earth wants to break open, but the depths will not devour us! Alas, where is there still a sea in which one could drown: thus our lament resounds – across shallow swamps.  Truly, we have grown too weary even to die; now we are still awake and we live on – in sepulchres!’ Thus did Zarathustra hear a prophet speak; 21 and his prophecy went to Zarathustra’s heart and transformed him.  He went about sad and weary; and he became like those of whom the prophet had spoken.  ‘Truly,’ he said to his disciples, ‘this long twilight is very nearly upon us.  Alas, how shall I preserve my light through it? ‘May it not be smothered in this sadness! It is meant to be a light to more distant worlds and to the most distant nights!’ Zarathustra went about grieving thus in his heart; and for three days he took no food or drink, had no rest and forgot speech.  At length it happened that he fell into a deep sleep.  And his disciples sat around him in the long watches of the night and waited anxiously to see if he would awaken and speak again and be cured of his affliction.  And this is the discourse that Zarathustra spoke when he awoke; his voice, however, came to his disciples as if from a great distance: Listen to the dream which I dreamed, friends, and help me to read its meaning! It is still a riddle to me, this dream; its meaning is hidden within it and imprisoned and does not yet fly above it with unconfined wings.  I dreamed I had renounced all life.  I had become a night-watchman and grave-watchman yonder upon the lonely hill-fortress of death.  Up there I guarded death’s coffins: the musty vaults stood full of these symbols of death’s victory.  Life overcome regarded me from glass coffins.  I breathed the odour of dust-covered eternities: my soul lay sultry and dust-covered.  And who could have ventilated his soul there? Brightness of midnight was all around me, solitude crouched beside it; and, as a third, the rasping silence of death, the worst of my companions.  I carried keys, the rustiest of all keys; and I could open with them the most creaking of all doors.  When the wings of this door were opened, the sound ran through the long corridors like an evil croaking; this bird cried out ill-temperedly, it did not want to be awakened.  But it was even more fearful and heart-tightening when it again became silent and still all around and I sat alone in that malignant silence.  So did time pass with me and creep past, if time still existed: what did I know of it I But at last occurred that which awakened me.  Three blows were struck on the door like thunderbolts, the vault resounded and roared three times again: then I went to the door.  Alpa! I cried, who is bearing his ashes to the mountain? Alpa! Alpa! Who is bearing his ashes to the mountain? And I turned the key and tugged at the door and exerted myself.  But it did not open by so much as a finger’s breadth: Then a raging wind tore the door asunder: whistling, shrilling and piercing it threw to me a black coffin: And in the roaring and whistling and shrilling, the coffin burst asunder and vomited forth a thousand peals of laughter.  And from a thousand masks of children, angels, owls, fools, and child-sized butterflies it laughed and mocked and roared at me.  This terrified me dreadfully: it prostrated me.  And I shrieked with horror as I had never shrieked before.  But my own shrieking awoke me – and I came to myself.  Thus Zarathustra narrated his dream and then fell silent: for he did not yet know the interpretation of his dream.  But the disciple whom he loved most arose quickly, grasped Zarathustra’s hand, and said: Your life itself interprets to us this dream, O Zarathustra! Are you yourself not the wind with a shrill whistling that tears open the doors of the fortress of death? Are you yourself not the coffin full of motley wickednesses and angel-masks of life? Truly, Zarathustra comes into all sepulchres like a thousand peals of children’s laughter, laughing at these night-watchmen and grave-watchmen, and whoever else rattles gloomy keys.  You will terrify and overthrow them with your laughter; fainting and reawakening will demonstrate your power over them.  And even when the long twilight and the weariness unto death appears, you will not set in our heaven, you advocate of life! You have shown us new stars and new glories of the night; truly, you have spread out laughter itself above us like a motley canopy.  Henceforth laughter of children will always issue from coffins; henceforth a strong wind will always come, victorious, to all weariness unto death: of that you yourself are our guarantee and prophet! Truly, you have dreamed your enemies themselves : that was your most oppressive dream! But as you awoke from them and came to yourself, so shall they awake from themselves – and come to you! Thus spoke the disciple; and all the others then pressed around Zarathustra and grasped his hands and sought to persuade him to leave his bed and his sadness and return to them.  But Zarathustra sat upon his bed erect and with an absent expression.  Like one who has returned home after being long in a strange land did he look upon his disciples and examine their faces; and as yet he did not recognize them.  But when they raised him and set him upon his feet, behold, his eye was suddenly transformed; he understood everything that had happened, stroked his beard, and said in a firm voice: Well now! This has had its time; but see to it, my disciples, that we have a good meal, and quickly! Thus I mean to do penance for bad dreams! The prophet, however, shall eat and drink beside me: and truly, I will yet show him a sea in which he can drown! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Then, however, he gazed long into the face of the disciple who had interpreted the dream, and shook his head.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra On the Blissful Islands T HE figs are falling from the trees, they are fine and sweet; and as they fall their red skins split.  I am a north wind to ripe figs.  Thus, like figs, do these teachings fall to you, my friends: now drink their juice and eat their sweet flesh! It is autumn all around and clear sky and afternoon.  Behold, what abundance is around us! And it is fine to gaze out upon distant seas from the midst of superfluity.  Once you said ‘God’ when you gazed upon distant seas; but now I have taught you to say ‘Superman’.  God is a supposition; but I want your supposing to teach no further than your creating will.  Could you create a god? – So be silent about all gods! But you could surely create the Superman.  Perhaps not you yourselves, my brothers! But you could transform yourselves into forefathers and ancestors of the Superman: and let this be your finest creating! God is a supposition: but I want your supposing to be bounded by conceivability.  Could you conceive a god? – But may the will to truth mean this to you: that everything shall be transformed into the humanly-conceivable, the humanly-evident, the humanly-palpable! You should follow your own senses to the end! And you yourselves should create what you have hitherto called the World: the World should be formed in your image by your reason, your will, and your love! And truly, it will be to your happiness, you enlightened men! And how should you endure life without this hope, you enlightened men? Neither in the incomprehensible nor in the irrational can you be at home.  But to reveal my heart entirely to you, friends: if there were gods, how could I endure not to be a god! Therefore there are no gods.  I, indeed, drew that conclusion; but now it draws me.  God is a supposition: but who could imbibe all the anguish of this supposition without dying? Shall the creator be robbed of his faith and the eagle of his soaring into the heights? God is a thought that makes all that is straight crooked and all that stands giddy.  What? Would time be gone and all that is transitory only a lie? To think this is giddiness and vertigo to the human frame, and vomiting to the stomach: truly, I call it the giddy sickness to suppose such a thing.  I call it evil and misanthropic, all this teaching about the one and the perfect and the unmoved and the sufficient and the intransitory.  All that is intransitory – that is but an image! 14 And the poets lie too much.  But the best images and parables should speak of time and becoming: they should be a eulogy and a justification of all transitoriness.  Creation – that is the great redemption from suffering, and life’s easement.  But that the creator may exist, that itself requires suffering and much transformation.  Yes, there must be much bitter dying in your life, you creators! Thus you are advocates and justifiers of all transitoriness.  For the creator himself to be the child new-born he must also be willing to be the mother and endure the mother’s pain.  Truly, I have gone my way through a hundred souls and through a hundred cradles and birth-pangs.  I have taken many departures, I know the heart-breaking last hours.  But my creative will, my destiny, wants it so.  Or, to speak more honestly: my will wants precisely such a destiny.  All feeling suffers in me and is in prison: but my willing always comes to me as my liberator and bringer of joy.  Willing liberates: that is the true doctrine of will and freedom – thus Zarathustra teaches you.  No more to will and no more to evaluate and no more to create! ah, that this great lassitude may ever stay far from me! In knowing and understanding, too, I feel only my will’s delight in begetting and becoming; and if there be innocence in my knowledge it is because will to begetting is in it.  This will lured me away from God and gods; for what would there be to create if gods – existed! But again and again it drives me to mankind, my ardent, creative will; thus it drives the hammer to the stone.  Ah, you men, I see an image sleeping in the stone, the image of my visions! Ah, that it must sleep in the hardest, ugliest stone! Now my hammer rages fiercely against its prison.  Fragments fly from the stone: what is that to me? I will complete it: for a shadow came to me – the most silent, the lightest of all things once came to me! The beauty of the Superman came to me as a shadow.  Ah, my brothers! What are the gods to me now! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Convalescent 1 O NE morning, not long after his return to the cave, Zarathustra sprang up from his bed like a madman, cried with a terrible voice, and behaved as if someone else were lying on the bed and would not rise from it; and Zarathustra’s voice rang out in such a way that his animals came to him in terror and from all the caves and hiding-places in the neighbourhood of Zarathustra’s cave all the creatures slipped away, flying, fluttering, creeping, jumping, according to the kind of foot or wing each had been given.  Zarathustra, however, spoke these words: Up, abysmal thought, up from my depths! I am your cockerel and dawn, sleepy worm: up! up! My voice shall soon crow you awake! Loosen the fetters of your ears: listen! For I want to hear you! Up! Up! Here is thunder enough to make even the graves listen! And wipe the sleep and all the dimness and blindness from your eyes! Hear me with your eyes, too: my voice is a medicine even for those born blind.  And once you are awake you shall stay awake for ever.  It is not my way to awaken great-grandmothers from sleep in order to bid them – go back to sleep! 39 Are you moving, stretching, rattling? Up! Up! You shall not rattle, you shall – speak to me! Zarathustra the Godless calls you! I, Zarathustra, the advocate of life, the advocate of suffering, the advocate of the circle – I call you, my most abysmal thought! Ah! you are coming – I hear you! My abyss speaks , I have turned my ultimate depth into the light! Ah! Come here! Give me your hand – ha! don’t! Ha, ha! – Disgust, disgust, disgust – woe is me! 2 Hardly had Zarathustra spoken these words, however, when he fell down like a dead man and remained like a dead man for a long time.  But when he again came to himself, he was pale and trembling and remained lying down and for a long time would neither eat nor drink.  This condition lasted seven days; his animals, however, did not leave him by day or night, except that the eagle flew off to fetch food.  And whatever he had collected and fetched he laid upon Zarathustra’s bed: so that at last Zarathustra lay among yellow and red berries, grapes, rosy apples, sweet-smelling herbs and pine-cones.  At his feet, however, two lambs were spread, which the eagle had, with difficulty, carried off from their shepherd.  At last, after seven days, Zarathustra raised himself in his bed, took a rosy apple in his hand, smelt it, and found its odour pleasant.  Then his animals thought the time had come to speak with him.  ‘O Zarathustra,’ they said, ‘now you have lain like that seven days, with heavy eyes: will you not now get to your feet again? ‘Step out of your cave: the world awaits you like a garden.  The wind is laden with heavy fragrance that longs for you; and all the brooks would like to run after you.  ‘All things long for you, since you have been alone seven days – step out of your cave! All things want to be your physicians! ‘Has perhaps a new knowledge come to you, a bitter, oppressive knowledge? You have lain like leavened dough, your soul has risen and overflowed its brim.’ ‘O my animals,’ answered Zarathustra, ‘go on talking and let me listen! Your talking is such refreshment: where there is talking, the world is like a garden to me.  How sweet it is, that words and sounds of music exist: are words and music not rainbows and seeming bridges between things eternally separated? ‘Every soul is a world of its own; for every soul every other soul is an afterworld.  ‘Appearance lies most beautifully among the most alike; for the smallest gap is the most difficult to bridge.  ‘For me – how could there be an outside-of-me? There is no outside! But we forget that, when we hear music; how sweet it is, that we forget! ‘Are things not given names and musical sounds, so that man may refresh himself with things? Speech is a beautiful foolery: with it man dances over all things.  ‘How sweet is all speech and all the falsehoods of music! With music does our love dance upon many-coloured rainbows.’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ said the animals then, ‘all things themselves dance for such as think as we: they come and offer their hand and laugh and flee – and return.  ‘Everything goes, everything returns; the wheel of existence rolls for ever.  Everything dies, everything blossoms anew; the year of existence runs on for ever.  ‘Everything breaks, everything is joined anew; the same house of existence builds itself for ever.  Everything departs, everything meets again; the ring of existence is true to itself for ever.  ‘Existence begins in every instant; the ball There rolls around every Here.  The middle is everywhere.  The path of eternity is crooked.’ ‘O you buffoons and barrel-organs!’ answered Zarathustra and smiled again;’ how well you know what had to be fulfilled in seven days: ‘and how that monster crept into my throat and choked me! But I bit its head off and spat it away.  ‘And you – have already made a hurdy-gurdy song of it? I, however, lie here now, still weary from this biting and spitting away, still sick with my own redemption.  ‘And you looked on at it all? O my animals, are you, too, cruel? Did you desire to be spectators of my great pain, as men do? For man is the cruellest animal.  ‘More than anything on earth he enjoys tragedies, bullfights, and crucifixions; and when he invented Hell for himself, behold, it was his heaven on earth.  ‘When the great man cries out, straightway the little man comes running; his tongue is hanging from his mouth with lasciviousness.  He, however, calls it his “pity”.  ‘The little man, especially the poet – how zealously he accuses life in words! Listen to it, but do not overlook the delight that is in all accusation! ‘Such accusers of life: life overcomes them with a glance of its eye.  “Do you love me?” it says impudently; “just wait a little, I have no time for you yet.” ‘Man is the cruellest animal towards himself; and with all who call themselves “sinners” and “bearers of the Cross” and “penitents” do not overlook the sensual pleasure that is in this complaint and accusation! ‘And I myself- do I want to be the accuser of man? Ah, my animals, this alone have I learned, that the wickedest in man is necessary for the best in him, ‘that all that is most wicked in him is his best strength and the hardest stone for the highest creator; and that man must grow better and wickeder: ‘To know: Man is wicked; that was to be tied to no torture-stake – but I cried as no one had cried before: ‘“Alas, that his wickedest is so very small! Alas, that his best is so very small!” ‘The great disgust at man – it choked me and had crept into my throat: and what the prophet prophesied: “It is all one, nothing is worth while, knowledge chokes.” ‘A long twilight limps in front of me, a mortally-weary, death-intoxicated sadness which speaks with a yawn.  ‘“The man of whom you are weary, the little man, recurs eternally” – thus my sadness yawned and dragged its feet and could not fall asleep.  ‘The human earth became to me a cave, its chest caved in, everything living became to me human decay and bones and mouldering past.  ‘My sighs sat upon all the graves of man and could no longer rise; my sighs and questions croaked and choked and gnawed and wailed by day and night: ‘“Alas, man recurs eternally! The little man recurs eternally!” ‘I had seen them both naked, the greatest man and the smallest man: all too similar to one another, even the greatest all too human! ‘The greatest all too small! – that was my disgust at man I And eternal recurrence even for the smallest! that was my disgust at all existence! ‘Ah, disgust! Disgust! Disgust!’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and sighed and shuddered; for he remembered his sickness.  But his animals would not let him speak further.  ‘Speak no further, convalescent!’ – thus his animals answered him, ‘but go out to where the world awaits you like a garden.  ‘Go out to the roses and bees and flocks of doves! But go out especially to the song-birds, so that you may learn singing from them! ‘For convalescents should sing; let the healthy talk.  And when the healthy man, too, desires song, he desires other songs than the convalescent.’ ‘O you buffoons and barrel-organs, do be quiet!’ answered Zarathustra and smiled at his animals.  ‘How well you know what comfort I devised for myself in seven days! ‘That I have to sing again – that comfort and this convalescence did I devise for myself: do you want to make another hurdy-gurdy song out of that, too?’ ‘Speak no further,’ his animals answered once more; ‘rather first prepare yourself a lyre, convalescent, a new lyre! ‘For behold, O Zarathustra! New lyres are needed for your new songs.  ‘Sing and bubble over, O Zarathustra, heal your soul with new songs, so that you may bear your great destiny, that was never yet the destiny of any man! ‘For your animals well know, O Zarathustra, who you are and must become: behold, you are the teacher of the eternal recurrence , that is now your destiny! ‘That you have to be the first to teach this doctrine – how should this great destiny not also be your greatest danger and sickness! ‘Behold, we know what you teach: that all things recur eternally and we ourselves with them, and that we have already existed an infinite number of times before and all things with us.  ‘You teach that there is a great year of becoming, a colossus of a year: this year must, like an hour-glass, turn itself over again and again, so that it may run down and run out anew: ‘so that all these years resemble one another, in the greatest things and in the smallest, so that we ourselves resemble ourselves in each great year, in the greatest things and in the smallest.  ‘And if you should die now, O Zarathustra: behold, we know too what you would then say to yourself – but your animals ask you not to die yet! ‘You would say – and without trembling, but rather gasping for happiness: for a great weight and oppression would have been lifted from you, most patient of men! ‘“Now I die and decay,” you would say, “and in an instant I shall be nothingness.  Souls are as mortal as bodies.  “‘But the complex of causes in which I am entangled will recur – it will create me again! I myself am part of these causes of the eternal recurrence.  “‘I shall return, with this sun, with this earth, with this eagle, with this serpent – not to a new life or a better life or a similar life: “‘I shall return eternally to this identical and self-same life, in the greatest things and in the smallest, to teach once more the eternal recurrence of all things, ‘“to speak once more the teaching of the great noontide of earth and man, to tell man of the Superman once more.  ‘“I spoke my teaching, I broke upon my teaching: thus my eternal fate will have it – as prophet do I perish! ‘“Now the hour has come when he who is going down shall bless himself.  Thus – ends Zarathustra’s down-going.’” When the animals had spoken these words they fell silent and expected that Zarathustra would say something to them: but Zarathustra did not hear that they were silent.  On the contrary, he lay still with closed eyes like a sleeper, although he was not asleep: for he was conversing with his soul.  The serpent and the eagle, however, when they found him thus silent, respected the great stillness around him and discreetly withdrew.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Sorcerer 1 W HEN Zarathustra had turned the corner around a rock, however, he saw not far below him on the same pathway a man who was throwing his arms about as if in a frenzy and who finally hurled himself to earth flat on his belly.  ‘Stop!’ said Zarathustra then to his heart, ‘he yonder must surely be the Higher Man, that evil cry of distress came from him – I will see if he can be helped.’ But when he ran to the spot where the man lay on the ground, he found a trembling old man with staring eyes; and however much Zarathustra tried to raise him and set him upon his legs, it was in vain.  Neither did the unfortunate man seem to notice that there was anyone with him; on the contrary, he continually looked around him with pathetic gestures, like one forsaken by and isolated from all the world.  Eventually, however, after much trembling, quivering, and self-contortion, he began to wail thus: Who still warms me, who still loves me? Offer me hot hands! Offer me coal-warmers for the heart! Spread-eagled, shuddering, Like a half-dead man whose feet are warmed – Shaken, alas! by unknown fevers, Trembling with sharp icy frost-arrows, Pursued by you, my thought! Unutterable, veiled, terrible one! Huntsman behind the clouds! Struck down by your lightning-bolt, You mocking eye that stares at me from the darkness – thus I lie, Bend myself, twist myself, tortured By every eternal torment, Smitten By you, cruel huntsman, You unknown – God! Strike deeper! Strike once again! Sting and sting, shatter this heart! What means this torment With blunt arrows? Why do you look down, Unwearied of human pain, With malicious divine flashing eyes? Will you not kill, Only torment, torment? Why – torment me , You malicious, unknown God? Ha ha! Are you stealing near? At such a midnight hour What do you want? Speak! You oppress me, press me – Ha! far too closely! Away! Away! You hear me breathing, You overhear my heart, You jealous God – Yet, jealous of what? Away! Away! Why the ladder? Would you climb Into my heart, Climb into my most secret Thoughts? Shameless, unknown – thief! What would you get by stealing? What would you get by listening? What would you get by torturing, You torturer? You – Hangman-god! Or shall I, like a dog, Roll before you? Surrendering, raving with rapture, Wag – love to you? In vain! Strike again, Cruellest knife! No, Not dog – I am only your game, Cruellest huntsman! Your proudest prisoner, You robber behind the clouds! For the last time, speak! What do you want, way layer, from me? You God veiled in lightning! Unknown One! Speak, What do you want, unknown – God? What? Ransom? How much ransom? Demand much – thus speaks my pride! And be brief – thus speaks my other pride! Ha ha! Me – you want me? Me – all of me?… Ha ha! And you torment me, fool that you are, You rack my pride? Offer me love – who still warms me? Who still loves me? – offer me hot hands! Offer me coal-warmers for the heart, Offer me, the most solitary, Whom ice, alas! sevenfold ice Has taught to long for enemies, For enemies themselves, Offer, yes yield to me, Cruellest enemy – Yourself ! He is gone! He himself has fled, My last, sole companion, My great enemy, My unknown, My Hangman-god! No! Come back, With all your torments! Oh come back To the last of all solitaries! All the streams of my tears Run their course to you! And the last flame of my heart – It burns up to you ! Oh come back, My unknown God! My pain! My last – happiness! 2 At this point, however, Zarathustra could restrain himself no longer; he took his stick and struck the wailing man with all his force.  ‘Stop!’ he shouted at him with furious laughter, ‘stop, you actor! You fabricator! You liar from the heart! I know you well! ‘I will warm your legs for you, you evil sorcerer, I well know how to make things warm for such as you!’ ‘Leave off,’ said the old man and jumped up from the ground, ‘beat me no more, O Zarathustra! I was doing it only in fun! ‘Such things are part of my art; I wanted to put you yourself to the proof when I gave you this exhibition! 42 And truly, you have seen well through me! ‘But you, too, have given me no small proof of yourself: you are hard , you wise Zarathustra! You strike hard with your “truths”, your cudgel forced from me – this truth!’ ‘Do not flatter,’ answered Zarathustra, still excited and frowning,’ you actor from the heart! You are false: why speak – of truth! ‘You peacock of peacocks, you ocean of vanity, what did you play before me, you evil sorcerer, in whom was I supposed to believe when you wailed in such a fashion?’ ‘ The penitent of the spirit ,’ said the old man, ‘it was he I played: you yourself once invented this expression – the poet and sorcerer who at last turns his spirit against himself, the transformed man who freezes through his bad knowledge and bad conscience.  ‘And just confess it: it took a long time, O Zarathustra, for you to see through my trick and lie! You believed in my distress when you took my head in your hands, ‘I heard you wail: “He has been too little loved, too little loved!” My wickedness rejoiced within me that I had deceived you so far.’ ‘You may have deceived subtler men than me,’ said Zarathustra severely.  ‘I am not on my guard against deceivers, I must be without caution: so my fate will have it.  ‘You, however, must deceive: I know you so far.  You must always be ambiguous, with two, three, four, five meanings! And what you just confessed was not nearly true enough and not nearly false enough for me! ‘You evil fabricator, how could you do otherwise! You would even deck your disease if you showed yourself naked to your physician.  ‘Thus you decked your lie before me when you said “I was doing it only in fun!” There was also earnestness in it, you are something of a penitent of the spirit! ‘I have divined you well: you have become the enchanter of everyone, but against yourself you have no lie and no cunning left – you are disenchanted with yourself! ‘You have reaped disgust as your single truth.  With you, no word is genuine any more, but your mouth is genuine: that is, the disgust that clings to your mouth.’ ‘But who are you!’ the old sorcerer cried at this point in a defiant voice, ‘who dares to speak like this to me , the greatest man, living today?’ – and a green lightning-flash shot from his eye at Zarathustra.  But immediately he changed and said sadly: ‘O Zarathustra, I am tired of it, my arts disgust me, I am not great , why do I pretend! But, you know it well – I sought greatness! ‘I wanted to appear a great man and I convinced many: but this lie has been beyond my strength.  I am collapsing under it.  ‘O Zarathustra, everything about me is a lie; but that I am collapsing – this is genuine !’ ‘It honours you,’ said Zarathustra gloomily, casting down his eyes, ‘it honours you that you sought greatness, but it also betrays you.  You are not great.  ‘You evil old sorcerer, this is the best and most honest thing that I honour in you, that you have grown weary of yourself and have declared “I am not great”.  ‘In that do I honour you as a penitent of the spirit: and, if only for a passing breath, in this one moment you were – genuine.  ‘But say, what do you seek here among my forests and cliffs? And when you laid yourself in my path, what proof did you want of me? ‘What did you test me in?’ Thus spoke Zarathustra and his eyes sparkled.  The old sorcerer was silent for a time, then he said: ‘Did I test you? I – only seek.  ‘O Zarathustra, I seek a genuine man, a proper, simple man, a man of one meaning and of all honesty, a repository of wisdom, a saint of knowledge, a great man! ‘For do you not know, O Zarathustra? I seek Zarathustra .’ And at this point a long silence arose between the two; Zarathustra, however, became deeply absorbed, so that he closed his eyes.  Then, however, returning to his companion, he grasped the sorcerer’s hand and said, with much politeness and guile: ‘Very well! Up yonder leads the way to where Zarathustra’s cave lies.  You may seek there him you wish to find.  ‘And ask advice of my animals, my eagle and my serpent: they shall help you seek.  But my cave is big.  ‘I myself, to be sure – I have never yet seen a great man.  The eye of the subtlest is crude today for what is great.  It is the kingdom of the mob.  ‘I have found so many who stretched and inflated themselves, and the people cried: “Behold a great man!” But what good are all bellows! The wind escapes from them at last.  ‘A frog that has blown itself out too long explodes at last: then the wind escapes.  To prick the belly of a puffed-up windbag I call a fine sport.  Hear that, lads! ‘Today belongs to the mob: who still knows what is great, what small! Who could successfully seek greatness there! Only a fool: a fool would succeed.  ‘Do you seek great men, you strange fool? Who taught you to? Is today the time for it? Oh, you evil seeker, why – do you tempt 43 me?’ Thus spoke Zarathustra, comforted at heart, and continued, laughing, on his way.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Love of One’s Neighbour Y OU crowd together with your neighbours and have beautiful words for it.  But I tell you: Your love of your neighbour is your bad love of yourselves.  You flee to your neighbour away from yourselves and would like to make a virtue of it: but I see through your ‘selflessness’.  The ‘You’ is older than the ‘I’; the ‘You’ has been consecrated, but not yet the ‘I’: so man crowds towards his neighbour.  Do I exhort you to love of your neighbour? I exhort you rather to flight from your neighbour and to love of the most distant! 11 Higher than love of one’s neighbour stands love of the most distant man and of the man of the future; higher still than love of man! account love of causes and of phantoms.  This phantom that runs along behind you, my brother, is fairer than you; why do you not give it your flesh and bones? But you are afraid and you run to your neighbour.  You cannot endure to be alone with yourselves and do not love yourselves enough: now you want to mislead your neighbour into love and gild yourselves with his mistake.  I wish rather that you could not endure to be with any kind of neighbour or with your neighbour’s neighbour; then you would have to create your friend and his overflowing heart out of yourselves.  You invite in a witness when you want to speak well of yourselves; and when you have misled him into thinking well of you, you then think well of yourselves.  It is not only he who speaks contrary to what he knows who lies, but even more he who speaks contrary to what he does not know.  And thus you speak of yourselves in your dealings with others and deceive your neighbour with yourselves.  Thus speaks the fool: ‘Mixing with people ruins the character, especially when one has none.’ One man runs to his neighbour because he is looking for himself, and another because he wants to lose himself.  Your bad love of yourselves makes solitude a prison to you.  It is the distant man who pays for your love of your neighbour; and when there are five of you together, a sixth always has to die.  I do not like your festivals, either: I have found too many actors there, and the audience, too, behaved like actors.  I do not teach you the neighbour but the friend.  May the friend be to you a festival of the earth and a foretaste of the Superman.  I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart.  But you must understand how to be a sponge if you want to be loved by overflowing hearts.  I teach you the friend in whom the world stands complete, a vessel of the good – the creative friend, who always has a complete world to bestow.  And as the world once dispersed for him, so it comes back to him again, as the evolution of good through evil, as the evolution of design from chance.  May the future and the most distant be the principle of your today: in your friend you should love the Superman as your principle.  My brothers, I do not exhort you to love of your neighbour: I exhort you to love of the most distant.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Way of the Creator M Y brother, do you want to go apart and be alone? Do you want to seek the way to yourself? Pause just a moment and listen to me.  ‘He who seeks may easily get lost himself.  It is a crime to go apart and be alone’ – thus speaks the herd.  The voice of the herd will still ring within you.  And when you say: ‘We have no longer the same conscience, you and I’, it will be a lament and a grief.  For see, it is still this same conscience that causes your grief: and the last glimmer of this conscience still glows in your affliction.  But you want to go the way of your affliction, which is the way to yourself? If so, show me your strength for it and your right to it! Are you a new strength and a new right? A first motion? A self-propelling wheel? Can you also compel stars to revolve about you? Alas, there is so much lusting for eminence! There is so much convulsion of the ambitious! Show me that you are not one of the lustful or ambitious! Alas, there are so many great ideas that do no more than a bellows: they inflate and make emptier.  Do you call yourself free? I want to hear your ruling idea, and not that you have escaped from a yoke.  Are you such a man as ought to escape a yoke? There are many who threw off their final worth when they threw off their bondage.  Free from what? Zarathustra does not care about that! But your eye should clearly tell me: free for what? Can you furnish yourself with your own good and evil and hang up your own will above yourself as a law? Can you be judge of yourself and avenger of your law? It is terrible to be alone with the judge and avenger of one’s own law.  It is to be like a star thrown forth into empty space and into the icy breath of solitude.  Today you still suffer from the many, O man set apart: today you still have your courage whole and your hopes.  But one day solitude will make you weary, one day your pride will bend and your courage break.  One day you will cry: ‘I am alone!’ One day you will no longer see what is exalted in you; and what is base in you, you will see all too closely; your sublimity itself will make you afraid, as if it were a phantom.  One day you will cry: ‘Everything is false!’ There are emotions that seek to kill the solitary; if they do not succeed, well, they must die themselves! But are you capable of being a murderer? My brother, have you ever known the word ‘contempt’? And the anguish of your justice in being just to those who despise you? You compel many to change their opinion about you; they hold that very much against you.  You approached them and yet went on past them: that they will never forgive you.  You go above and beyond them: but the higher you climb, the smaller you appear to the eye of envy.  And he who flies is hated most of all.  ‘How could you be just towards me?’ – that is how you must speak – ‘I choose your injustice as my portion.’ They throw injustice and dirt at the solitary: but, my brother, if you want to be a star, you must shine none the less brightly for them on that account! And be on your guard against the good and just! They would like to crucify those who devise their own virtue -they hate the solitary.  Be on your guard, too, against holy simplicity! Everything which is not simple is unholy to it: and it, too, likes to play, with fire – in this case, the fire of the stake.  And be on your guard, too, against the assaults your love makes upon you! The solitary extends his hand too quickly to anyone he meets.  To many men, you ought not to give your hand, but only your paw 12 : and I should like it if your paw had claws, too.  But you yourself will always be the worst enemy you can encounter; you yourself lie in wait for yourself in caves and forests.  Solitary man, you are going the way to yourself! And your way leads past yourself and your seven devils! You will be a heretic to yourself and a witch and a prophet and an evil-doer and a villain.  You must be ready to burn yourself in your own flame: how could you become new, if you had not first become ashes? Solitary man, you are going the way of the creator: you want to create yourself a god from your seven devils! Solitary man, you are going the way of the lover: you love yourself and for that reason you despise yourself as only lovers can despise.  The lover wants to create, because he despises! What does he know of love who has not had to despise precisely what he loved? Go apart and be alone with your love and your creating, my brother; and justice will be slow to limp after you.  Go apart and be alone with my tears, my brother.  I love him who wants to create beyond himself, and thus perishes.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Leech A ND Zarathustra walked thoughtfully farther and deeper through forests and past swampy places; but, as happens with those who think on difficult things, on his way he unintentionally trod on a man.  And behold, all at once a cry of pain and two curses and twenty little invectives spurted up into his face: so that in his fright he raised his stick and brought it down on the man he had trodden on.  But he immediately came to his senses; and his heart laughed at the folly he had just committed.  ‘Forgive me,’ he said to the man he had trodden on, who had angrily risen and sat down again, ‘forgive me and first of all accept a parable.  ‘How a wanderer dreaming of distant things unintentionally stumbles over a dog on a lonely road, a dog lying in the sun: ‘how they both start up and let fly at one another like mortal enemies, these two, frightened to death: thus it happened with us.  ‘And yet! And yet – how little was lacking for them to caress one another, this dog and this solitary! For they are both- solitaries!’ ‘Whoever you may be,’ said the trodden-on man, still angry, ‘you have come too near me with your parable and not only with your foot! ‘For look, am I a dog?’ – and thereupon the sitting man arose and drew his naked arm from the swamp.  For previously he had lain stretched out on the ground, concealed and unrecognizable, like someone lying in wait for swamp game.  ‘But what are you doing!’ cried Zarathustra in alarm, for he saw that a great deal of blood was running down the naked arm, ‘what has happened to you? Has an evil beast bitten you, unhappy man?’ The bleeding man laughed, still irritated.  ‘What is it to do with you!’ he said, and made to go off.  ‘Here I am at home and in my domain.  Whoever wants to question me, let him: but I shall hardly reply to a blockhead!’ ‘You are wrong,’ said Zarathustra compassionately, and held him fast, ‘you are wrong: here you are not in your own home but in my kingdom, and I will have no one come to harm here.  ‘But none the less, call me what you like – I am what I must be.  I call myself Zarathustra.  ‘Very well! Up yonder leads the way to Zarathustra’s cave: it is not far – will you not tend your wounds in my home? ‘Things have gone ill with you in this life, you unhappy man: first a beast bit you, and then – a man trod on you!’ But when the trodden-on man heard the name of Zarathustra, he changed.  ‘What has happened to me!’ he cried; ‘who concerns me in this life except this one man, Zarathustra, and that one beast that lives on blood, the leech? ‘For the sake of the leech I have lain here beside this swamp like a fisherman, and already my outstretched arm has been bitten ten times; now a fairer leech bites for my blood, Zarathustra himself! ‘Oh happiness! Oh wonder! Praised be this day, that lured me to this swamp! Praised be the best, liveliest cupping-glass alive today, praised be the great leech of conscience, Zarathustra!’ Thus spoke the man who had been trodden on; and Zarathustra rejoiced at his words and their fine, respectful manner.  ‘Who are you?’ he asked, and offered him his hand, ‘between us there is still much to elucidate and dear up: but already, it seems to me, it is bright, broad daylight.’ ‘I am the conscientious man of the spirit ,’ answered the other, ‘and scarcely anyone is sterner, stricter, and more severe in things of the spirit than I, apart from him from whom I learned, Zarathustra himself.  ‘Better to know nothing than half-know many things! Better to be a fool on one’s own account than a wise man at the approval of others! I – go to the root of things: ‘what matter if it be great or small? If it be swamp or sky? A hand’s breadth of ground is enough for me: if only it be thoroughly firm ground! ‘a hand’s breadth of ground: one can stand upon that.  In truly conscientious knowledge there is nothing great and nothing small.’ ‘So perhaps you are an expert on the leech?’ asked Zarathustra.  ‘And do you probe the leech down to its ultimate roots, conscientious man?’ ‘O Zarathustra,’ answered the man who was trodden on, ‘that would be a colossal task, how could I undertake it! ‘But what I am master of and expert on is the leech’s brain – that is my world! ‘And that too is a world! But forgive me that my pride here speaks out, for here I have not my equal.  That is why I said “Here I am at home”.  ‘How long have I probed this one thing, the brain of the leech, so that slippery truth should here no longer slip away from me! Here is my kingdom! ‘For its sake I have cast away all others, for its sake I have grown indifferent to all others; and close beside my knowledge couches my black ignorance.  ‘The conscience of my spirit demands of me that I know one thing and apart from that know nothing: I am disgusted by all the semi-intellectual, all the vaporous, hovering, visionary.  ‘Where my honesty ceases I am blind and want to be blind.  But where I want to know I also want to be honest, that is, severe, stern, strict, cruel, inexorable.  ‘Because you , O Zarathustra, once said: “Spirit is the life that itself cuts into life”, that led and seduced me to your teaching.  And truly, with my own blood have I increased my own knowledge!’ ‘As the evidence indicates,’ Zarathustra interposed; for blood continued to run down the naked arm of the man of conscience.  For ten leeches had bitten into it.  ‘Oh you strange fellow, how much this evidence tells me, for it tells me about yourself! And perhaps I could not pour all of it into your stern ears! ‘Very well! Let us part here! But I should like to meet you again.  Up yonder leads the way to my cave: tonight you shall there be my welcome guest! ‘And I should also like to make amends to your body for treading upon you: I shall think about that.  But now a cry of distress calls me hurriedly away from you.’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Old and New Law – Tables 1 H ERE I sit and wait, old shattered law-tables around me and also new, half-written law-tables.  When will my hour come? – the hour of my down-going, my descent: for I want to go to men once more.  For that I now wait: for first the sign that it is my hour must come to me – namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.  Meanwhile I talk to myself, as one who has plenty of time.  No one tells me anything new; so I tell myself to myself.  2 When I visited men, I found them sitting upon an old self-conceit.  Each one thought he had long since known what was good and evil for man.  All talk of virtue seemed to them an ancient wearied affair; and he who wished to sleep well spoke of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ before retiring.  I disturbed this somnolence when I taught that nobody yet knows what is good and evil – unless it be the creator! But he it is who creates a goal for mankind and gives the earth its meaning and its future: he it is who creates the quality of good and evil in things.  And I bade them overturn their old professorial chairs, and wherever that old self-conceit had sat.  I bade them laugh at their great masters of virtue and saints and poets and world-redeemers.  I bade them laugh at their gloomy sages, and whoever had sat as a black scarecrow, cautioning, on the tree of life.  I sat myself on their great grave-street, and even beside carrion and vultures – and I laughed over all their ‘past’ and its decayed expiring glory.  Truly, like Lenten preachers and fools did I cry anger and shame over all their great and small things – their best is so very small! Their worst is so very small! – thus I laughed.  Thus from out of me cried and laughed my wise desire, which was born on the mountains, a wild wisdom, in truth! – my great desire with rushing wings.  And often it tore me forth and up and away and in the midst of laughter: and then indeed I flew, an arrow, quivering with sun-intoxicated rapture: out into the distant future, which no dream has yet seen, into warmer Souths than artists have ever dreamed of, there where gods, dancing, are ashamed of all clothes – so that I might speak in parables, and hobble and stutter like poets: and truly, I am ashamed that I still have to be a poet! Where all becoming seemed to me the dancing of gods and the wantonness of gods, and the world unrestrained and abandoned and fleeing back to itself – as many gods eternally fleeing and re-seeking one another, as many gods blissfully self-contradicting, communing again and belonging again to one another – Where all time seemed to me a blissful mockery of moments, where necessity was freedom itself, which blissfully played with the goad of freedom – Where I found again my old devil and arch-enemy, the Spirit of Gravity, and all that he created: compulsion, dogma, need and consequence and purpose and will and good and evil: For must there not exist that which is danced upon , danced across? Must there not be moles and heavy dwarfs – for the sake of the nimble, the nimblest? 3 There it was too that I picked up the word ‘Superman’ and that man is something that must be overcome, that man is a bridge and not a goal; counting himself happy for his noontides and evenings, as a way to new dawns: Zarathustra’s saying of the great noontide, and what ever else I have hung up over men, like a purple evening afterglow.  Truly, I showed them new stars, together with new nights – and over cloud and day and night I spread out laughter like a coloured canopy.  I taught them all my art and aims: to compose into one and bring together what is fragment and riddle and dreadful chance in man – as poet, reader of riddles, and redeemer of chance, I taught them to create the future, and to redeem by creating – all that was past .  To redeem that past of mankind and to transform every ‘It was’, until the will says: ‘But I willed it thus! So shall I will it-’ this did I call redemption, this alone did I teach them to call redemption.  Now I await my redemption – that I may go to them for the last time.  For I want to go to man once more: I want to go under among them, I want to give them, dying, my richest gift! From the sun when it goes down, that superabundant star, I learned this: then, from inexhaustible riches it pours out gold into the sea – so that the poorest fisherman rows with golden oars! For once I saw this, and did not tire of weeping to see it.  Like the sun, Zarathustra also wants to go down: now he sits here and waits, old shattered law-tables around him and also new law-tables – half-written.  4 Behold, here is a new law-table: but where are my brothers, to bear it with me to the valley and to fleshly hearts? Thus commands my great love for the most distant men: Do not spare your neighbour! Man is something that must be overcome.  There are diverse paths and ways to overcoming: just look to it! But only a buffoon thinks: ‘Man can also jumped over ’.  Overcome yourself even in your neighbour: and a right that you can seize for yourself you should not accept as a gift! What you do, no one can do to you.  Behold, there is no requital.  He who cannot command himself should obey.  And many a one can command himself but be very remiss in obeying what he commands! 5 This is the will of those of noble soul: they desire nothing gratis , least of all life.  He who is of the mob wants to live gratis; we others, however, to whom life has given itself- we are always considering what we can best give in return ! And truly, it is a noble speech that says: ‘What life has promised us, we shall keep that promise – to life!’ One should not wish to enjoy where one has not given enjoyment.  And – one should not wish to enjoy! For enjoyment and innocence are the most modest things: neither want to be looked for.  One should have them – but one should look rather for guilt and pain! 6 O my brothers, he who is a first-born is always sacrificed.  Now we are first-born.  We all bleed at secret sacrificial tables, we all burn and roast to the honour of ancient idols.  Our best is still young: this excites old palates.  Our flesh is tender, our skin is only a lamb-skin: – how should we not excite old idol-priests! He still lives on in us ourselves , the old idol-priest, who roasts our best for his feast.  Alas, my brothers, how should the firstborn not be sacrifices! But our kind will have it thus; and I love those who do not wish to preserve themselves.  I love with my whole love those who go down and perish: for they are going beyond.  7 To be truthful – few can do it! And those who can, will not! Least of all, however, can the good be truthful.  Oh these good men! Good men never tell the truth; to be good in that way is a sickness of the spirit.  They yield, these good men, they acquiesce, their hearts imitate, they obey from the heart: but he who obeys does not listen to himself ! All that the good call evil must come together that one truth may be born: O my brothers, are you, too, evil enough for this truth? The bold attempt, prolonged mistrust, the cruel No, satiety, the cutting into die living – how seldom do these come together! But from such seed is – truth raised.  Hitherto all knowledge has grown up beside the bad conscience! Shatter, you enlightened men, shatter the old law-tables! 8 When water is planked over so that it can be walked upon, when gangway and railings span the stream: truly, he is not believed who says: ‘Everything is in flux.’ 33 On the contrary, even simpletons contradict him.  ‘What?’ say the simpletons, ‘everything in flux? But there are planks and railings over the stream! ‘Over the stream everything is firmly fixed, all the values of things, the bridges, concepts, all “Good” and “Evil”: all are firmly fixed !’ But when hard winter comes, the animal-tamer of streams, then even the cleverest learn mistrust; and truly, not only the simpletons say then: ‘Is not everything meant to – stand still?’ ‘Fundamentally, everything stands still’ – that is a proper winter doctrine, a fine thing for unfruitful seasons, a fine consolation for hibernators and stay at-homes.  ‘Fundamentally, everything stands still’ – the thawing wind, however, preaches to the contrary ! The thawing wind, an ox that is no ploughing ox – a raging ox, a destroyer that breaks ice with its angry horns! Ice, however – breaks gangways ! O my brothers, is everything not now in flux? Have not all railings and gangways fallen into the water and come to nothing? Who can still cling to ‘good’ and ‘evil’? ‘Woe to us! Hail to us! The thawing wind is blowing!’ – Preach thus, O my brothers, through every street! 9 There is an old delusion that is called good and evil.  Up to now, this delusion has orbited about prophets and astrologers.  Once people believed in prophets and astrologers: and therefore people believed: ‘Everything is fate: you shall, for you must!’ Then again people mistrusted all prophets and astrologers: and therefore people believed: ‘Everything is freedom: you can, for you will!’ O my brothers, up to now there has been only supposition, not knowledge, concerning the stars and the future: and therefore there has hitherto been only supposition, not knowledge, concerning good and evil! 10 ‘You shall not steal! You shall not kill!’ – such words were once called holy; in their presence people bowed their knees and their heads and removed their shoes.  But I ask you: Where have there ever been better thieves and killers in the world than such holy words have been? Is there not in all life itself- stealing and killing? And when such words were called holy was not truth itself – killed? Or was it a sermon of death that called holy that which contradicted and opposed all life? – O my brothers, shatter, shatter the old law-tables! 11 My pity for all that is past is that I see: It has been handed over – handed over to the favour, the spirit, the madness of every generation that comes and transforms everything that has been into its own bridge! A great despot could come, a shrewd devil, who with his favour and disfavour could compel and constrain all that is past, until it became his bridge and prognostic and herald and cock-crow.  This, however, is the other danger and my other pity: he who is of the mob remembers back to his grandfather – with his grandfather, however, time stops.  Thus all that is past is handed over: for the mob could one day become master, and all time be drowned in shallow waters.  Therefore, O my brothers, is a new nobility needed: to oppose all mob-rule and all despotism and to write anew upon new law-tables the word: ‘Noble’.  For many noblemen are needed, and noblemen of many kinds, for nobility to exist ! Or, as I once said in a parable: ‘Precisely this is godliness, that there are gods but no God!’ 12 O my brothers, I direct and consecrate you to a new nobility: you shall become begetters and cultivators and sowers of the future – truly, not to a nobility that you could buy like shopkeepers with shopkeepers’ gold: for all that has a price is of little value.  Let where you are going, not where you come from, henceforth be your honour I Your will and your foot that desires to step out beyond you – let them be your new honour! Truly, not that you have served a prince – of what account are princes now! – or have become a bulwark to that which stands, that it may stand more firmly! Not that your family have grown courtly at courts and you have learned to stand for long hours in shallow pools, motley-coloured like a flamingo: for being able to stand is a merit with courtiers; and all courtiers believe that part of the bliss after death is – being allowed to sit! And not that a ghost, called holy, led your ancestors into promised lands that I do not praise: for in the land where the worst of all trees, the Cross, grew – there is nothing to praise! – and truly, wherever this ‘Holy Ghost’ led its knights, goats and geese and Cross-eyed and wrong-headed fellows always – ran at the bead of the procession! O my brothers, your nobility shall not gaze backward, but outward ! You shall be fugitives from all fatherlands and fore-fatherlands! You shall love your children’s land : let this love be your new nobility – the undiscovered land in the furthest sea! I bid your sails seek it and seek it! You shall make amends to your children for being the children of your fathers: thus you shall redeem all that is past I This new law-table do I put over you! 13 ‘Wherefore live? All is vanity! To live – that means to thrash straw; to live – that means to burn oneself and yet not become warm.’ Ancient rigmarole like this still counts as ‘wisdom’; and it is the more honoured because it is old and smells damp.  Even mould ennobles.  Children might speak in this way: they shrink from the fire because it has burned them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.  And how should he who is always ‘thrashing straw’ be allowed to slander thrashing! Such a fool would have to have his mouth stopped! Such people sit down to dinner and bring nothing with them, not even a good appetite – and now they say slanderously: ‘All is vanity!’ But to eat and drink well, O my brothers, is truly no vain art! Shatter, shatter the law-tables of the never-joyful! 14 ‘To the pure all things are pure’ – thus speaks the people.  But I say to you: To the swine all things become swinish! That is why the fanatics and hypocrites with bowed heads whose hearts too are bowed down preach: ‘The world itself is a filthy monster.’ For they all have an unclean spirit; but especially those who have no peace or rest except they see the world from behind – these afterworldsmen! I tell these to their faces, although it does not sound pleasant: The world resembles man in that it has a behind – so much is true! There is much filth in the world: so much is true! But the world itself is not yet a filthy monster on that account! There is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smells ill: disgust itself creates wings and water-divining powers! Even in the best there is something to excite disgust; and even the best is something that must be overcome! O my brothers, there is much wisdom in the fact that there is much filth in the world! 15 These sayings I heard pious afterworldsmen say to their consciences, and truly without deceit or falsehood, although there is nothing more false or deceitful in the world.  ‘Let the world be! Do not raise even a finger against it!’ ‘Let him who wants to slaughter and kill and harass and swindle the people: do not raise even a finger against it! Thus they will yet learn to renounce the world.’ ‘And your own reason – you shall yourself choke and throttle; for it is a reason of this world – thus you shall yourself learn to renounce the world.’ Shatter, O my brothers, shatter these ancient law-tables of the pious! Shatter by your teachings the sayings of the world-calumniators! 16 ‘He who learns much, unlearns all violent desiring’ – people whisper that to one another today in all dark streets.  ‘Wisdom makes weary, nothing is worth while; you shall not desire!’ – I found this new law-table hanging even in public market-places.  Shatter, O my brothers, shatter this new law-table too! The world-weary and the preachers of death hung it up, and so did the jailers: for behold, it is also a sermon urging slavery: They have learned badly and the best things not at all, they have learned everything too early and too fast: they have eaten badly – that is how they got that stomach-ache – for their spirit is stomach-ache: it counsels death! For truly, my brothers, the spirit is a stomach! Life is a fountain of delight: but all wells are poisoned for him from whom an aching stomach, the father of affliction, speaks.  To know: that is delight to the lion-willed! But he who has grown weary is only ‘willed’, he is the sport of every wave.  And that is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on their way.  And at last their weariness asks: ‘Why have we ever taken any way? It is a matter of indifference!’ It sounds pleasant to their ears when it is preached: ‘Nothing is worth while! You shall not will!’ This, however, is a sermon urging slavery.  O my brothers, Zarathustra comes as a fresh, blustering wind to all the way-weary; he will yet make many noses sneeze! My liberal breath blows even through walls and into prisons and imprisoned spirits! Willing liberates: for willing is creating: thus I teach.  And you should learn only for creating! And you should first learn from me even how to learn, how to learn well! – He who has ears to hear, let him hear! 17 There stands the boat – over there is perhaps the way to the great Nothingness.  But who wants to step into this ‘perhaps’? None of you wants to step into the death-boat! How then could you be world-weary? World-weary! And you have not yet even parted from the earth!! have always found you still greedy for the earth, still in love with your own weariness of the earth! Your lip does not hang down in vain – a little earthly wish still sits upon it I And in your eye – does not a little cloud of unforgotten earthly joy swim there? There are many excellent inventions on earth, some useful, some pleasant: the earth is to be loved for their sake.  And there are many things so well devised that they are like women’s breasts: at the same time useful and pleasant.  But you world-weary people! You should be given a stroke of the cane! Your legs should be made sprightly again with cane-strokes! For: if you are not invalids and worn-out wretches of whom the earth is weary, you are sly sluggards or dainty, sneaking lust-cats.  And if you will not again run about merrily, you shall – pass away! One should not want to be physician to the incurable: thus Zarathustra teaches: so you shall pass away! But to make an end requires more courage than to make a new verse: all physicians and poets know that.  18 O my brothers, there are law-tables framed by weariness and law-tables framed by laziness, indolent laziness: although they speak similarly they want to be heard differently.  Look here at this languishing man! He is only an inch from his goal, but from weariness he has laid himself defiantly here in the dust: this valiant man! He yawns from weariness at the path and the earth and the goal and at himself: he refuses to take another step – this valiant man! Now the sun burns down upon him and the dogs lick his sweat: but he lies there in his defiance and prefers to languish – to languish an inch from his goal! Truly, he will have to be pulled into his heaven by the hair – this hero! Better to leave him lying where he has laid himself, so that sleep, the comforter, may come to him with cooling, murmuring rain: Let him lie until he awakes of his own accord, until of his own accord he disavows all weariness and what weariness has taught through him! Only, my brothers, scare away the dogs from him, the indolent skulkers, and all the swarming vermin – all the swarming ‘cultured’ vermin who feast upon the sweat of every hero! 19 I form circles and holy boundaries around myself; fewer and fewer climb with me upon higher and higher mountains: I build a mountain-range out of holier and holier mountains.  But wherever you would climb with me, O my brothers, see to it that we parasite climbs with you! Parasite: that is a worm, a creeping, supple worm, that wants to grow fat on your sick, sore places.  And it is its art to divine the weary spots in climbing souls: it builds its loathsome nest in your grief and dejection, in your tender modesty.  Where the strong man is weak, where the noble man is too gentle, there it builds its loathsome nest: the parasite dwells where the great man possesses little sore places.  Which is the highest type of being and which the lowest? The parasite is the lowest type; but he who is of the highest type nourishes the most parasites.  For the soul which possesses the longest ladder and can descend the deepest: how should the most parasites not sit upon it? the most spacious soul, which can run and stray and roam the farthest into itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy hurls itself into chance – the existing soul which plunges into becoming; the possessing soul which wants to partake in desire and longing – the soul fleeing from itself which retrieves itself in the widest sphere; the wisest soul, to which foolishness speaks sweetest – the soul that loves itself the most, in which all things have their current and counter-current and ebb and flow: – oh how should the highest soul not possess the worst parasites? 20 O my brothers, am I then cruel? But I say: That which is falling should also be pushed! Everything of today – it is falling, it is decaying: who would support it? But I – want to push it too! Do you know the delight that rolls stones into precipitous depths? – These men of today: just see how they roll into my depths! I am a prologue to better players, O my brothers! An example! 34 Follow my example! And him you do not teach to fly, teach – to fallfaster ! 21 I love the brave: but it is not enough to be a swordsman, one must also know against whom to be a swordsman! And there is often more bravery in containing oneself and passing by: in order to spare oneself for a worthier enemy! You should have enemies whom you hate but not enemies whom you despise: you must be proud of your enemy: thus I taught once before.  You should spare yourselves, O my friends, for a worthier enemy: therefore you must pass many things by, especially must you pass by many of the rabble who din in your ears about people and peoples.  Keep your eye clear of their For and Against! There is much right, much wrong in it: whoever looks on grows angry.  To look in, to weigh in – that comes to the same thing in this case: therefore go off into the forests and lay your sword to sleep! Go your ways! And let people and peoples go theirs! – dark ways, to be sure, on which not one hope lightens any longer! Let the shopkeeper rule where everything that still glisters is – shopkeeper’s gold! The age of kings is past: what today calls itself the people deserves no king.  Just see how these people themselves now behave like shopkeepers: they glean the smallest advantage from sweepings of every kind.  They lie in wait for one another, they wheedle things out of one another – they call that ‘good neighbourliness’.  Oh blessed, distant time when a people said to itself: ‘I want to be – master over peoples!’ For, my brothers: the best shall rule, the best wants to rule! And where it is taught differently, there – the best is lacking .  22 If they – had bread for nothing, alas! – what would they cry for! Their maintenance – that is their proper entertainment; 35 and life shall be hard for them! They are beasts of prey: even in their ‘working’ – there is robbery, even in their’ earning’ – there is fraud! Therefore life shall be hard for them! Thus they shall become finer beasts of prey, subtler, cleverer, more man-like beasts of prey: for man is the finest beast of prey.  Man has already robbed all beasts of their virtues: that is why, of all beasts, life is the hardest for man.  Only the birds are still beyond him.  And if man should learn to fly, alas I to what height – would his rapaciousness fly! 23 This is how I would have man and woman: the one fit for war, the other fit for bearing children, but both fit for dancing with head and heels.  And let that day be lost to us on which we did not dance once! And let that wisdom be false to us that brought no laughter with it! 24 Your marriage-contracting: see it is not a bad contracting .  You have decided too quickly: from that follows – break up of marriage.  36 And yet rather break up of marriage than bending of marriage, lying in marriage! – A woman said to me: ‘True, I broke up my marriage, but first my marriage – broke me up!’ I have always found the badly-paired to be the most revengeful: they make everybody suffer for the fact that they are no longer single.  For that reason I want honest people to say to one another: ‘We love each other: let us see to it that we stay in love! Or shall our promise be a mistake? 37 ‘Allow us a term and a little marriage, to see if we are fit for the great marriage! It is a big thing always to be with another!’ Thus I counsel all honest people; and what would be my love for the Superman and for everything to come if I should counsel and speak otherwise! To propagate yourselves, not only forward but upward – may the garden of marriage assist you, O my brothers! 25 He who has grown wise concerning old origins, behold, he will at last seek new springs of the future and new origins.  O my brothers, it will not be long before new peoples shall arise and new springs rush down into new depths.  For the earthquake – that blocks many wells and causes much thirst – also brings to light inner powers and secret things.  The earthquake reveals new springs.  In the earthquake of ancient peoples new springs break forth.  And around him who cries: ‘Behold here a well for many who are thirsty, one heart for many who long, one will for many instruments’ – around him assembles a people , that is to say: many experimenters.  Who can command, who can obey – that is experimented here ! Alas, with what protracted searching and succeeding, and failing and learning and experimenting anew! Human society: that is an experiment, so I teach – a long search: 38 it seeks, however, the commander! – an experiment, O my brothers I And not a ‘contract’ I Shatter, shatter that expression of the soft-hearted and half-and-half! 26 O my brothers! With whom does the greatest danger for the whole human future lie? Is it not with the good and just?– with those who say and feel in their hearts: ‘We already know what is good and just, we possess it too; woe to those who are still searching for it!’ And whatever harm the wicked may do, the harm the good do is the most harmful harm! And whatever harm the world-calumniators may do, the harm the good do is the most harmful harm.  O my brothers, someone who once looked into the heart of the good and just said: ‘They are the Pharisees.’ But he was not understood.  The good and just themselves could not understand him: their spirit is imprisoned in their good conscience.  The stupidity of the good is unfathomably clever.  But it is the truth: the good have to be Pharisees – they have no choice! The good have to crucify him who devises his own virtue! That is the truth! But the second man to discover their country, the country, heart, and soil of the good and just, was he who asked:’ Whom do they hate the most?’ They hate the creator most: him who breaks the law-tables and the old values, the breaker – they call him the law-breaker.  For the good – cannot create: they are always the beginning of the end:– they crucify him who writes new values on new law-tables, they sacrifice the future to themselves – they crucify the whole human future! The good – have always been the beginning of the end.  27 O my brothers, have you understood this saying, too? And what I once said about the ‘Ultimate Man’? With whom does the greatest danger to the whole human future lie? Is it not with the good and just? Shatter, shatter the good and just! – O my brothers, have you understood this saying, too? 28 Do you flee from me? Are you frightened? Do you tremble at this saying? O my brothers, when I bade you shatter the good and the law-tables of the good, only then did I embark mankind upon its high seas.  And only now does the great terror, the great prospect, the great sickness, the great disgust, the great sea-sickness come to it.  The good taught you false shores and false securities; you were born and kept in the lies of the good.  Everything has been distorted and twisted down to its very bottom through the good.  But he who discovered the country of ‘Man’, also discovered the country of ‘Human Future’.  Now you shall be seafarers, brave, patient seafarers! Stand up straight in good time, O my brothers, learn to stand up straight! The sea is stormy: many want to straighten themselves again by your aid.  The sea is stormy: everything is at sea.  Well then! Come on, you old seaman-hearts! What of fatherland! Our helm wants to fare away , out to where our children’s land is! Out, away, more stormy than the sea, storms our great longing! 29 ‘Why so hard?’ the charcoal once said to the diamond; ‘for are we not close relations?’ Why so soft? O my brothers, thus I ask you: for are you not – my brothers? Why so soft, so unresisting and yielding? Why is there so much denial and abnegation in your hearts? So little fate in your glances? And if you will not be fates, if you will not be inexorable: how can you – conquer with me? And if your hardness will not flash and cut and cut to pieces: how can you one day – create with me? For creators are hard.  And it must seem bliss to you to press your hand upon millennia as upon wax, bliss to write upon the will of millennia as upon metal – harder than metal, nobler than metal.  Only the noblest is perfectly hard.  This new law-table do I put over you, O my brothers: Become hard ! 30 O my Will! My essential, my necessity, dispeller of need! Preserve me from all petty victories! O my soul’s predestination, which I call destiny! In-me! Over-me! Preserve and spare me for a great destiny! And your last greatness, my Will, save for your last – that you may be inexorable in your victory! Ah, who has not succumbed to his own victory! Ah, whose eye has not dimmed in this intoxicated twilight! Ah, whose foot has not stumbled and in victory forgotten – how to stand! That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide: ready and ripe like glowing ore, like cloud heavy with lightning and like swelling milk-udder – ready for myself and my most secret Will: a bow eager for its arrow, an arrow eager for its star – a star, ready and ripe in its noontide, glowing, transpierced, blissful through annihilating sun-arrows – a sun itself and an inexorable sun-will, ready for annihilation in victory! O Will, my essential, my necessity, dispeller of need! Spare me for one great victory! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Compassionate M Y friends, your friend has heard a satirical saying: ‘Just look at Zarathustra! Does he not go among us as if among animals?’ But it is better said like this: ‘The enlightened man goes among men as among animals.’ The enlightened man calls man himself: the animal with red cheeks.  How did this happen to man? Is it not because he has had to be ashamed too often? Oh my friends! Thus speaks the enlightened man: ‘Shame, shame, shame – that is the history of man!’ And for that reason the noble man resolves not to make others ashamed: he resolves to feel shame before all sufferers.  Truly, I do not like them, the compassionate who are happy in their compassion: they are too lacking in shame.  If I must be compassionate I still do not want to be called compassionate; and if I am compassionate then it is preferably from a distance.  And I should also prefer to cover my head and flee away before I am recogni2ed: and thus I bid you do, my friends! May my destiny ever lead across my path only those who, like you, do not sorrow or suffer, and those with whom I can have hope and repast and honey in common! Truly, I did this and that for the afflicted; but it always seemed to me I did better things when I learned to enjoy myself better.  As long as men have existed, man has enjoyed himself too little: that alone, my brothers, is our original sin! And if we learn better to enjoy ourselves, we best unlearn how to do harm to others and to contrive harm.  Therefore I wash my hand when it has helped a sufferer, therefore I wipe my soul clean as well.  For I saw the sufferer suffer, and because I saw it I was ashamed on account of his shame; and when I helped him, then I sorely injured his pride.  Great obligations do not make a man grateful, they make him resentful; and if a small kindness is not forgotten it becomes a gnawing worm.  ‘Be reserved in accepting! Honour a man by accepting from him!’ – thus I advise those who have nothing to give.  I, however, am a giver: I give gladly as a friend to friends.  But strangers and the poor may pluck the fruit from my tree for themselves: it causes less shame that way.  Beggars, however, should be entirely abolished! Truly, it is annoying to give to them and annoying not to give to them.  And likewise sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: stings of conscience teach one to sting.  But worst of all are petty thoughts.  Truly, better even to have done wickedly than to have thought pettily! To be sure, you will say: ‘Delight in petty wickedness spares us many a great evil deed.’ But here one should not wish to be spared.  The evil deed is like a boil: it itches and irritates and breaks forth – it speaks honourably.  ‘Behold, I am disease’ – thus speaks the evil deed; that is its honesty.  But the petty thought is like a canker: it creeps and hides and wants to appear nowhere – until the whole body is rotten and withered by little cankers.  But I whisper this advice in the ear of him possessed of a devil: ‘Better for you to rear your devil! There is a way to greatness even for you!’ Ah, my brothers! One knows a little too much about everybody! And many a one who has become transparent to us is still for a long time invulnerable.  It is hard to live with men, because keeping silent is so hard.  And we are the most unfair, not towards him whom we do not like, but towards him for whom we feel nothing at all.  But if you have a suffering friend, be a resting-place for his suffering, but a resting-place like a hard bed, a camp-bed: thus you will serve him best.  And should your friend do you a wrong, then say: ‘I forgive you what you did to me; but that you did it to yourself – how could I forgive that?’ Thus speaks all great love: it overcomes even forgiveness and pity.  One should hold fast to one’s heart; for if one lets it go, how soon one loses one’s head, too! Alas, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the compassionate? And what in the world has caused more suffering than the follies of the compassionate? Woe to all lovers who cannot surmount pity! Thus spoke the Devil to me once: ‘Even God has his Hell: it is his love for man.’ And I lately heard him say these words: ‘God is dead; God has died of his pity for man.’ So be warned against pity: thence shall yet come a heavy cloud for man! Truly, I understand weather-signs! But mark, too, this saying: All great love is above pity: for it wants – to create what is loved! ‘I offer myself to my love, and my neighbour as myself ’ – that is the language of all creators.  All creators, however, are hard.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Great Events T HERE is an island in the sea – not far from the Blissful Islands of Zarathustra – upon which a volcano continually smokes; the people, and especially the old women among the people, say that it is placed like a block of stone before the gate of the underworld, but that the narrow downward path which leads to this gate of the underworld passes through the volcano itself.  Now at the time Zarathustra was living on the Blissful Islands it happened that a ship dropped anchor at the island upon which the smoking mountain stood; and its crew landed in order to shoot rabbits.  Towards the hour of noon, however, when the captain and his men were reassembled, they suddenly saw a man coming towards them through the air, and a voice said clearly: ‘It is time! It is high time!’ But as the figure was closest to them – it flew quickly past, however, like a shadow, in the direction of the volcano – they recognized, with the greatest consternation, that it was Zarathustra; for all of them had seen him before, except the captain himself, and they loved him as the people love: that is, with love and awe in equal parts.  ‘Just look!’ said the old steersman, ‘there is Zarathustra going to Hell!’ At the same time as these sailors landed on the volcano island, the rumour went around that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were questioned, they said that he had gone aboard a ship by night without saying where he intended to sail.  Thus there arose a disquiet; after three days, however, there was added to this disquiet the story of the sailors – and then all the people said that the Devil had carried Zarathustra off.  Of course, his disciples laughed at this talk; and one of them even said: ‘I would rather believe that Zarathustra had carried off the Devil.’ But at the bottom of their souls they were all full of apprehension and longing: so great was their joy when, on the fifth day, Zarathustra appeared among them.  And this is the tale of Zarathustra’s conversation with the fire-dog: The earth (he said) has a skin; and this skin has diseases.  One of these diseases, for example, is called ‘Man’.  And another of these diseases is called ‘the fire-dog’: men have told many lies and been told many lies about him .  To fathom this secret I fared across the sea: and I have seen truth naked, truly! barefoot to the neck.  Now I know all about the fire-dog; and also about all the revolutionary and subversive devils which not only old women fear.  ‘Up with you, fire-dog, up from your depth!’ I cried, ‘and confess how deep that depth is! Where does it come from, that which you snort up? ‘You drink deeply from the sea: your bitter eloquence betrays that! Truly, for a dog of the depths you take your food too much from the surface! ‘At the best, I hold you to be the earth’s ventriloquist: and when I have heard subversive and revolutionary devils speak, I have always found them like you: bitter, lying, and superficial.  ‘You understand how to bellow and how to darken the air with ashes! You are the greatest braggart and have sufficiently learned the art of making mud boil.  ‘Where you are there must always be mud around and much that is spongy, hollow, and compressed: it wants to be freed.  ‘“Freedom”, you all most like to bellow: but I have unlearned belief in “great events” whenever there is much bellowing and smoke about them.  ‘And believe me, friend Infernal-racket! The greatest events – they are not our noisiest but our stillest hours.  ‘The world revolves, not around the inventors of new noises, but around the inventors of new values; it revolves inaudibly .  ‘And just confess! Little was ever found to have happened when your noise and smoke dispersed.  What did it matter that a town had been mummified and a statue lay in the mud! ‘And I say this to the overthrowers of statues: To throw salt into the sea and statues into the mud are perhaps the greatest of follies.  ‘The statue lay in the mud of your contempt: but this precisely is its law, that its life and living beauty grow again out of contempt! ‘And now it arises again, with diviner features and sorrowfully-seductive; and in truth! it will even thank you for overthrowing it, you overthrowers! ‘I tender, however, this advice to kings and churches and to all that is weak with age and virtue – only let yourselves be overthrown! That you may return to life, and that virtue – may return to you!’ Thus I spoke before the fire-dog: then he interrupted me sullenly and asked: ‘The church? What is that then?’ ‘The church?’ I answered.  ‘The church is kind of state, and indeed the most mendacious kind.  But keep quiet, you hypocrite dog! You surely know your own kind best! ‘Like you, the state is a hypocrite dog; like you, it likes to speak with smoke and bellowing – to make believe, like you, that it speaks out of the belly of things.  ‘For the state wants to be absolutely the most important beast on earth; and it is believed to be so, too!’ When I said that, the fire-dog acted as if he were mad with envy.  ‘What?’ he cried, ‘the most important beast on earth? And it is believed to be so, too?’ And so much steam and hideous shrieking came from his throat I thought he would choke with vexation and envy.  At length he grew quieter and his panting ceased; as soon as he was quiet, however, I said laughing; ‘You are vexed, fire-dog: therefore I am right about you! ‘And that I may press my point, let me speak of another fire-dog, which really speaks from the heart of the earth.  ‘His breath exhales gold and golden rain: so his heart will have it.  What are ashes and smoke and hot mud to him now! ‘Laughter flutters from him like a motley cloud; he is ill-disposed towards your gurgling and spitting and griping of the bowels! ‘Gold and laughter, however, he takes from the heart of the earth: for, that you may know it – the heart of the earth is of gold .  ’ When the fire-dog heard this he could no longer bear to listen to me.  Abashed, he drew in his tail, said ‘Bow-wow’ in a small voice and crawled down into his cave.  Thus narrated Zarathustra.  But his disciples hardly listened to him, so great was their desire to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits, and the flying man.  ‘What am I to think of it?’ said Zarathustra.  ‘Am I then a ghost? ‘But it will have been my shadow.  Surely you have heard something of the Wanderer and his Shadow? 20 ‘This, however, is certain: I must keep it under stricter control – otherwise it will ruin my reputation.’ And once again Zarathustra shook his head and wondered.  ‘What am I to think of it?’ he said again.  ‘Why, then, did the phantom cry: “It is time! It is high time!”? ‘ For what , then, is it – high time?’ Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra ZARATHUSTRA’S DISCOURSES Of the Three Metamorphoses I NAME you three metamorphoses of the spirit: how the spirit shall become a camel, and the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.  There are many heavy things for the spirit, for the strong, weight-bearing spirit in which dwell respect and awe: its strength longs for the heavy, for the heaviest.  What is heavy? thus asks the weight-bearing spirit, thus it kneels down like the camel and wants to be well laden.  What is the heaviest thing, you heroes? so asks the weight-bearing spirit, that I may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.  Is it not this: to debase yourself in order to injure your pride? To let your folly shine out in order to mock your wisdom? Or is it this: to desert our cause when it is celebrating its victory? To climb high mountains in order to tempt the tempter? Or is it this: to feed upon the acorns and grass of knowledge and for the sake of truth to suffer hunger of the soul? Or is it this: to be sick and to send away comforters and make friends with the deaf, who never hear what you ask? Or is it this: to wade into dirty water when it is the water of truth, and not to disdain cold frogs and hot toads? Or is it this: to love those who despise us and to offer our hand to the ghost when it wants to frighten us? The weight-bearing spirit takes upon itself all these heaviest things: like a camel hurrying laden into the desert, thus it hurries into its desert.  But in the loneliest desert the second metamorphosis occurs: the spirit here becomes a lion; it wants to capture freedom and be lord in its own desert.  It seeks here its ultimate lord: it will be an enemy to him and to its ultimate God, it will struggle for victory with the great dragon.  What is the great dragon which the spirit no longer wants to call lord and God? The great dragon is called ‘Thou shalt’.  But the spirit of the lion says ‘I will!’ ‘Thou shalt’ lies in its path, sparkling with gold, a scale-covered beast, and on every scale glitters golden ‘Thou shalt’.  Values of a thousand years glitter on the scales, and thus speaks the mightiest of all dragons: ‘All the values of things – glitter on me.  ‘All values have already been created, and all created values – are in me.  Truly, there shall be no more “I will”!’ Thus speaks the dragon.  My brothers, why is the lion needed in the spirit? Why does the beast of burden, that renounces and is reverent, not suffice? To create new values – even the lion is incapable of that: but to create itself freedom for new creation – that the might of the lion can do.  To create freedom for itself and a sacred No even to duty: the lion is needed for that, my brothers.  To seize the right to new values – that is the most terrible proceeding for a weight-bearing and reverential spirit Truly, to this spirit it is a theft and a work for an animal of prey.  Once it loved this ‘Thou shalt’ as its holiest thing: now it has to find illusion and caprice even in the holiest, that it may steal freedom from its love: the lion is needed for this theft.  But tell me, my brothers, what can the child do that even the lion cannot? Why must the preying lion still become a child? The child is innocence and forgetfulness, a new beginning, a sport, a self-propelling wheel, a first motion, a sacred Yes.  Yes, a sacred Yes is needed, my brothers, for the sport of creation: the spirit now wills its own will, the spirit sundered from the world now wins its own world.  I have named you three metamorphoses of the spirit: how the spirit became a camel, and the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  And at that time he was living in the town called The Pied Cow.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Voluntary Death M ANY die too late and some die too early.  Still the doctrine sounds strange: ‘Die at the right time.’ Die at the right time: thus Zarathustra teaches.  To be sure, he who never lived at the right time could hardly die at the right time! Better if he were never to be born! – Thus I advise the superfluous.  But even the superfluous make a great thing of their dying; yes, even the hollowest nut wants to be cracked.  Everyone treats death as an important matter: but as yet death is not a festival.  As yet, men have not learned to consecrate the fairest festivals.  I shall show you the consummating death, which shall be a spur and a promise to the living.  The man consummating his life dies his death triumphantly, surrounded by men filled with hope and making solemn vows.  Thus one should learn to die; and there should be no festivals at which such a dying man does not consecrate the oaths of the living! To die thus is the best death; but the second best is: to die in battle and to squander a great soul.  But equally hateful to the fighter as to the victor is your grinning death, which comes creeping up like a thief – and yet comes as master.  I commend to you my sort of death, voluntary death that comes to me because I wish it.  And when shall I wish it? – He who has a goal and an heir wants death at the time most favourable to his goal and his heir.  And out of reverence for his goal and his heir he will hang up no more withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.  Truly, I do not want to be like the rope-makers: they spin out their yarn and as a result continually go backwards themselves.  Many a one grows too old even for his truths and victories; a toothless mouth has no longer the right to every truth.  And everyone who wants glory must take leave of honour in good time and practise the difficult art of – going at the right time.  One must stop permitting oneself to be eaten when one tastes best: this is understood by those who want to be loved long.  To be sure, there are sour apples whose fate is to wait until the last day of autumn: and they become at the same time ripe, yellow, and shrivelled.  In some the heart ages first and in others the spirit.  And some are old in their youth: but those who are young late stay young long.  For many a man, life is a failure: a poison-worm eats at his heart.  So let him see to it that his death is all the more a success.  Many a man never becomes sweet, he rots even in the summer.  It is cowardice that keeps him fastened to his branch.  Many too many live and they hang on their branches much too long.  I wish a storm would come and shake all this rottenness and worm-eatenness from the tree! I wish preachers of speedy death would come! They would be the fitting storm and shakers of the trees of life! But I hear preached only slow death and patience with all ‘earthly things’.  Ah, do you preach patience with earthly things? It is these earthly things that have too much patience with you, you blasphemers! Truly, too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow death honour: and that he died too early has since been a fatality for many.  As yet he knew only tears and the melancholy of the Hebrews, together with the hatred of the good and just -the Hebrew Jesus: then he was seized by the longing for death.  Had he only remained in the desert and far from the good and just! Perhaps he would have learned to live and learned to love the earth – and laughter as well! Believe it, my brothers! He died too early; he himself would have recanted his teaching had he lived to my age! He was noble enough to recant! But he was still immature.  The youth loves immaturely and immaturely too he hates man and the earth.  His heart and the wings of his spirit are still bound and heavy.  But there is more child in the man than in the youth, and less melancholy: he has a better understanding of life and death.  Free for death and free in death, one who solemnly says No when there is no longer time for Yes: thus he understands life and death.  That your death may not be a blasphemy against man and the earth, my friends: that is what I beg from the honey of your soul.  In your death, your spirit and your virtue should still glow like a sunset glow around the earth: otherwise yours is a bad death.  Thus I want to die myself, that you friends may love the earth more for my sake; and I want to become earth again, that I may have peace in her who bore me.  Truly, Zarathustra had a goal, he threw his ball: now may you friends be the heirs of my goal, I throw the golden ball to you.  But best of all I like to see you, too, throwing on the golden ball, my friends! So I shall stay on earth a little longer: forgive me for it! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Intoxicated Song 1 M EANWHILE, however, one after another had gone out into the open air and the cool, thoughtful night; but Zarathustra himself led the ugliest man by the hand, to show him his nocturnal world and the big, round moon and the silver waterfalls beside his cave.  There at last they stood silently together, just a group of old folk, but with comforted, brave hearts and amazed in themselves that it was so well with them on earth; but the mystery of the night drew nearer and nearer their hearts.  And Zarathustra thought to himself again: ‘Oh, how well they please me now, these Higher Men!’ – but he did not say it, for he respected their happiness and their silence.  Then, however, occurred the most astonishing thing in that long, astonishing day: the ugliest man began once more and for the last time to gurgle and snort, and when he at last came to the point of speech, behold, a question leaped round and pure from his mouth, a good, deep, clear question, which moved the hearts of all who heard it.  ‘My assembled friends,’ said the ugliest man, ‘what do you think? For the sake of this day – I am content for the first time to have lived my whole life.  ‘And it is not enough that I testify only this much.  It is worth while to live on earth: one day, one festival with Zarathustra has taught me to love the earth.  ‘“Was that – life?” I will say to death.  “Very well! Once more!”’ ‘My friends, what do you think? Will you not, like me, say to death: “Was that – life? For Zarathustra’s sake, very well! Once more!’ Thus spoke the ugliest man; and it was not long before midnight.  And what would you think then took place? As soon as the Higher Men had heard his question, they were all at once conscious of their transformation and recovery, and of who had given them these things: then they leaped towards Zarathustra, thanking, adoring, caressing, kissing his hands, each after his own fashion: so that some laughed, some wept.  The old prophet, however, danced with pleasure; and even if he was then full of sweet wine, as some narrators believe, he was certainly fuller still of sweet life and had renounced all weariness.  There are even those who tell that the ass danced at that time: for not in vain had the ugliest man given it wine to drink.  This may be the case, or it may be otherwise; and if in truth the ass did not dance that evening, greater and stranger marvels than the dancing of an ass occurred.  In brief, as Zarathustra’s saying has it: ‘What does it matter!’ 2 Zarathustra, however, when this incident with the ugliest man occurred, stood there like one intoxicated: his eyes grew dim, his tongue stammered, his feet tottered.  And who could divine what thoughts then passed over Zarathustra’s soul? But it seemed that his soul fell back and fled before him and was in remote distances and as if ‘upon a high ridge’, as it is written, ‘wandering like a heavy cloud between past and future.’ But gradually, while the Higher Men were holding him in their arms, he came to himself a little and his hands restrained the adoring and anxious throng; yet he did not speak.  All at once, however, he swiftly turned his head, for he seemed to hear something: then he laid a finger to his lips and said: ‘Come! ’ And at once it grew still and mysterious all around; from the depths, however, there slowly arose the sound of a bell.  Zarathustra listened to it, as the Higher Men did; then he laid a finger to his lips a second time and said again: ‘Come! Come! Midnight is coming on !’ and his voice had altered.  But still he did not move from his place: then it grew yet more still and mysterious, and everything listened, even the ass and Zarathustra’s animals of honour, the eagle and the serpent, likewise Zarathustra’s cave and the great, cool moon and the night itself.  Zarathustra, however, laid his hand to his lips for the third time and said: Come! Come! Come! Let us walk now! The hour has come: let us walk into the night ! 3 You Higher Men, midnight is coming on: so I will say something in your ears, as that old bell says it in my ear, as secretly, as fearfully, as warmly as that midnight-bell tells it to me, which has experienced more than one man: which has already counted your fathers’ painful heartbeats -ah! ah! how it sighs! how in dreams it laughs! the ancient, deep, deep midnight! Soft! Soft! Then many a thing can be heard which may not speak by day; but now, in the cool air, when all the clamour of your hearts, too, has grown still, now it speaks, now it is heard, now it creeps into nocturnal, over-wakeful souls: ah! ah! how it sighs! how in dreams it laughs! do you not hear, how secretly, fearfully, warmly it speaks to you, the ancient, deep, deep midnight? O Man! Attend ! 4 Woe is me! Where has time fled? Did I not sink into deep wells? The world is asleep Ah! Ah! The dog howls, the moon is shining.  I will rather die, die, than tell you what my midnight-heart is now thinking.  Now I am dead.  It is finished.  Spider, why do you spin your web around me? Do you want blood? Ah! Ah! The dew is falling, the hour has come – the hour which chills and freezes me, which asks and asks and asks: ‘Who has heart enough for it? ‘ – who shall be master of the world? Who will say: Thus shall you run, you great and small streams!’ – the hour approaches: O man, you Higher Man, attend! this discourse is for delicate ears, for your ears – what does deep midnight’s voice contend? 5 I am borne away, my soul dances.  The day’s task! The day’s task! Who shall be master of the world? The moon is cool, the wind falls silent.  Ah I Ah! Have you flown high enough? You dance: but a leg is not a wing.  You good dancers, now all joy is over: wine has become dregs, every cup has grown brittle, the graves mutter.  You have not flown high enough: now the graves mutter: ‘Redeem the dead! Why is it night so long? Does the moon not intoxicate us?’ You Higher Men, redeem the graves, awaken the corpses! Alas, why does the worm still burrow? The hour approaches, it approaches, the bell booms, the heart still drones, the woodworm, the heart’s worm, still burrows.  Alas! The world is deep ! 6 Sweet lyre! Sweet lyre! Your sound, your intoxicated, ominous sound, delights me! – from how long ago, from how far away does your sound come to me, from a far distance, from the pools of love! You ancient bell, you sweet lyre! Every pain has torn at your heart, the pain of a father, the pain of our fathers, the pain of our forefathers; your speech has grown ripe, ripe like golden autumn and afternoon, like my hermit’s heart – now you say: The world itself has grown ripe, the grapes grow brown, now they want to die, to die of happiness.  You Higher Men, do you not smell it? An odour is secretly welling up, a scent and odour of eternity, an odour of roseate bliss, a brown, golden wine odour of ancient happiness, of intoxicated midnight’s dying happiness, which sings: The world is deep: deeper than day can comprehend ! 7 Let me be! Let me be! I am too pure for you.  Do not touch me! Has my world not just become perfect? My skin is too pure for your hands.  Let me be, stupid, doltish, stifling day! Is midnight not brighter? The purest shall be master of the world; the least known, the strongest, the midnight souls, who are brighter and deeper than any day.  O day, do you grope for me? Do you feel for my happiness? Do you think me rich, solitary, a pit of treasure, a chamber of gold? O world, do you desire me? Do you think me worldly? Do you think me spiritual? Do you think me divine? But day and world, you are too clumsy, have cleverer hands, reach out for deeper happiness, for deeper unhappiness, reach out for some god, do not reach out for me: my unhappiness, my happiness is deep, you strange day, but yet I am no god, no divine Hell: deep is its woe , 8 God’s woe is deeper, you strange world I Reach out for God’s woe, not for me! What am I? An intoxicated, sweet lyre – a midnight lyre, a croaking bell which no one understands but which has to speak before deaf people, you Higher Men! For you do not understand me! Gone! Gone! Oh youth! Oh noontide! Oh afternoon! Now come evening and midnight; the dog howls, the wind: is the wind not a dog? It whines, it yelps, it howls.  Ah! Ah! how it sighs! how it laughs, how it rasps and gasps, the midnight hour! How it now speaks soberly, this intoxicated poet! perhaps it has overdrunk its drunkenness? perhaps it has grown over-wakeful? perhaps it ruminates? it ruminates upon its woe in dreams, the ancient, deep midnight hour, and still more upon its joy.  For joy, though woe be deep: Joy is deeper than heart’s agony .  9 You grape-vine! Why do you praise me? For I cut you! I am cruel, you bleed: what means your praise of my intoxicated cruelty? ‘What has become perfect, everything ripe – wants to die!’ thus you speak.  Blessed, blessed be the vine-knife! But everything unripe wants to live: alas! Woe says: ‘Fade! Be gone, woe!’ But everything that suffers wants to live, that it may grow ripe and merry and passionate, passionate for remoter, higher, brighter things.  ‘I want heirs,’ thus speaks everything that suffers, ‘I want children, I do not want myself .  ’ Joy, however, does not want heirs or children, joy wants itself, wants eternity, wants recurrence, wants everything eternally the same.  Woe says: ‘Break, bleed, heart! Walk, legs! Wings, fly! Upward! Upward, pain!’ Very well! Come on! my old heart: Woe says: Fade! Go ! 10 What do you think, you Higher Men? Am I a prophet? A dreamer? A drunkard? An interpreter of dreams? A midnight bell? A drop of dew? An odour and scent of eternity? Do you not hear it? Do you not smell it? My world has just become perfect, midnight is also noonday, pain is also joy, a curse is also a blessing, the night is also a sun – be gone, or you will learn: a wise man is also a fool.  Did you ever say Yes to one joy? O my friends, then you said Yes to all woe as well.  All things are chained and entwined together, all things are in love; if ever you wanted one moment twice, if ever you said: ‘You please me, happiness, instant, moment!’ then you wanted everything to return I you wanted everything anew, everything eternal, everything chained, entwined together, everything in love, O that is how you loved the world, you everlasting men, loved it eternally and for all time: and you say even to woe:’ Go, but return!’ For all joy wants -eternity ! 11 All joy wants the eternity of all things, wants honey, wants dregs, wants intoxicated midnight, wants graves, wants the consolation of graveside tears, wants gilded sunsets, what does joy not want! it is thirstier, warmer, hungrier, more fearful, more secret than all woe, it wants itself; it bites into itself , the will of the ring wrestles within it, it wants love, it wants hatred, it is superabundant, it gives, throws away, begs for someone to take it, thanks him who takes, it would like to be hated; so rich is joy that it thirsts for woe, for Hell, for hatred, for shame, for the lame, for the world – for it knows, oh it knows this world! You Higher Men, joy longs for you, joy the intractable, blissful – for your woe, you ill-constituted! All eternal joy longs for the ill-constituted.  For all joy wants itself, therefore it also wants heart’s agony I O happiness! O pain! Oh break, heart! You Higher Men, learn this, learn that joy wants eternity, joy wants the eternity of all things, wants deep, deep, deep eternity ! 12 Have you now learned my song? Have you divined what it means? Very well! Come on! You Higher Men, now sing my roundelay! Now sing yourselves the song whose name is ‘Once more’, whose meaning is ‘To all eternity!’ – sing, you Higher Men, Zarathustra’s roundelay! O Man! Attend! What does deep midnight’s voice contend? ‘I slept my sleep, ‘And now awake at dreaming’s end: ‘The world is deep, ‘Deeper than day can comprehend.  ‘Deep is its woe, ‘Joy – deeper than heart’s agony: ‘Woe says: Fade! Go! ‘Bat all joy wants eternity, ‘Wants deep, deep, deep eternity !’ Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Seven Seals (or: The Song of Yes and Amen) 1 I F I be a prophet and full of that prophetic spirit that wanders on high ridges between two seas, wanders between past and future like a heavy cloud, enemy to sultry lowlands and to all that is weary and can neither die nor live: ready for lightning in its dark bosom and for redeeming beams of light, pregnant with lightnings which affirm Yes! laugh Yes! ready for prophetic lightning-flashes: but blessed is he who is thus pregnant! And, in truth, he who wants to kindle the light of the future must hang long over the mountains like a heavy storm! Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 2 If ever my anger broke graves open, moved boundary-stones, and rolled old shattered law-tables into deep chasms: if ever my mockery blew away mouldered words, and if I came like a broom to the Cross-spiders and as a scouring wind to old sepulchres: if ever I sat rejoicing where old gods lay buried, world-blessing, world-loving, beside the monuments of old world-slanderers: for I love even churches and the graves of gods, if only heaven is looking, pure-eyed, through their shattered roofs; I like to sit like grass and red poppies on shattered churches: Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love VCM , O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 3 If ever a breath of the creative breath has come to me, and a breath of that heavenly necessity that compels even chance to dance in star-rounds: if ever I have laughed with the laugh of the creative lightning, which the thunder of the deed, grumbling but obedient, follows: if ever I have played dice with the gods at their table, the earth, so that the earth trembled and broke open and streams of fire snorted forth: for the earth is a table of the gods, and trembling with creative new words and the dice throws of the gods: Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 4 If ever I have drunk a full draught from that foaming mixing-bowl of spice, in which all things are well compounded: if ever my hand has welded the furthest to the nearest, and fire to spirit and joy to sorrow and the wickedest to the kindest: if I myself am a grain of that redeeming salt that makes everything mix well together in the bowl: for there is a salt that unites good with evil; and even the most evil is worthy to be a spice and a last over-foaming: Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 5 If I love the sea and all that is sea like, and love it most when it angrily contradicts me: if that delight in seeking that drives sails towards the undiscovered is in me, if a seafarer’s delight is in my delight: if ever my rejoicing has cried:’ The shore has disappeared – now the last fetter falls from me, ‘the boundless roars around me, far out glitter space and time, well then, come on! old heart!’ Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 6 If my virtue is a dancer’s virtue, and if I often leap with both feet in golden-emerald rapture: if my wickedness is a laughing wickedness, at home among rose bowers and hedges of lilies: for in laughter all evil is present, but sanctified and absolved through its own happiness: and if it be my Alpha and Omega that everything heavy shall become light, every body a dancer, all spirit a bird: and, truly, that is my Alpha and Omega! Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! 7 If ever I spread out a still sky above myself and flew with my own wings into my own sky: if, playing, I have swum into deep light-distances and bird-wisdom came to my freedom: but thus speaks bird-wisdom: ‘Behold, there is no above, no below! Fling yourself about, out, back, weightless bird I Sing! speak no more! ‘are not all words made for the heavy? Do not all words lie to the light? Sing! speak no more!’ Oh how should I not lust for eternity and for the wedding ring of rings – the Ring of Recurrence! Never yet did I find the woman by whom I wanted children, unless it be this woman, whom I love: for I love you, O Eternity! For I love you, O Eternity! Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of the Land of Culture I FLEW too far into the future: a horror assailed me.  And when I looked around, behold! time was my only contemporary.  Then I flew back, homeward – and faster and faster I flew: and so I came to you, you men of the present, and to the land of culture.  The first time I brought with me an eye to see you and healthy desires: truly, I came to you with longing in my heart.  But how did I fare? Although I was so afraid – I had to laugh! My eye had never seen anything so motley-spotted! I laughed and laughed, while my foot still trembled and my heart as well: ‘Here must be the home of all the paint-pots!’ I said.  Painted with fifty blotches on face and limbs: thus you sat there to my astonishment, you men of the present! And with fifty mirrors around you, flattering and repeating your opalescence! Truly, you could wear no better masks than your own faces, you men of the present! Who could – recognize you! Written over with the signs of the past and these signs over-daubed with new signs: thus you have hidden yourselves well from all interpreters of signs! And if one tests your virility, one finds only sterility! You seem to be baked from colours and scraps of paper glued together.  All ages and all peoples gaze motley out of your veils; all customs and all beliefs speak motley out of your gestures.  He who tore away from you your veils and wraps and paint and gestures would have just enough left over to frighten the birds.  Truly, I myself am the frightened bird who once saw you naked and without paint; and I flew away when the skeleton made advances to me.  I would rather be a day-labourer in the underworld and among the shades of the bygone! – Even the inhabitants of the underworld are fatter and fuller than you! This, yes this is bitterness to my stomach, that I can endure you neither naked nor clothed, you men of the present! And the unfamiliar things of the future, and whatever frightened stray birds, are truly more familiar and more genial than your ‘reality’.  For thus you speak: ‘We are complete realists, and without belief or superstition’: thus you thump your chests – alas, even without having chests! But how should you be able to believe, you motley-spotted men! – you who are paintings of all that has ever been believed! You are walking refutations of belief itself and the fracture of all thought.  Unworthy of belief : that is what I call you, you realists! All ages babble in confusion in your spirits; and the dreaming and babbling of all ages was more real than is your waking! You are unfruitful: therefore you lack belief.  But he who had to create always had his prophetic dreams and star-auguries -and he believed in belief! You are half-open doors at which grave-diggers wait.  And this is your reality: ‘Everything is worthy of perishing.’ Ah, how you stand there, you unfruitful men, how lean-ribbed! And, indeed, many of you have noticed that.  And they have said:’ Perhaps a god has secretly taken something from me there as I slept? Truly, sufficient to form a little woman for himself! ‘Amazing is the poverty of my ribs!’ That is how many a present-day man has spoken.  Yes, you are laughable to me, you men of the present! And especially when you are amazed at yourselves! And woe to me if I could not laugh at your amazement and had to drink down all that is repulsive in your bowels.  However, I will make light of you, since I have heavy things to carry; and what do I care if beetles and dragonflies sit themselves on my bundle! Truly, it shall not become heavier on that account! And the great weariness shall not come to me from you, you men of the present.  Alas, whither shall I climb now with my longing? I look out from every mountain for fatherlands and motherlands.  But nowhere have I found a home; I am unsettled in every city and I depart from every gate.  The men of the present, to whom my heart once drove me, are strange to me and a mockery; and I have been driven from fatherlands and motherlands.  So now I love only my children’s land , the undiscovered land in the furthest sea: I bid my sails seek it and seek it.  I will make amends to my children for being the child of my fathers: and to all the future – for this present! Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra Of Joys and Passions M Y brother, if you have a virtue and it is your own virtue, you have it in common with no one.  To be sure, you want to call it by a name and caress it; you want to pull its ears and amuse yourself with it.  And behold! Now you have its name in common with the people and have become of the people and the herd with your virtue! You would do better to say: ‘Unutterable and nameless is that which torments and delights my soul and is also the hunger of my belly.’ Let your virtue be too exalted for the familiarity of names: and if you have to speak of it, do not be ashamed to stammer.  Thus say and stammer: ‘This is my good, this I love, just thus do I like it, only thus do I wish the good.  ‘I do not want it as a law of God, I do not want it as a human statute: let it be no sign-post to superearths and paradises.  ‘It is an earthly virtue that I love: there is little prudence in it, and least of all common wisdom.  ‘But this bird has built its nest beneath my roof: therefore I love and cherish it – now it sits there upon its golden eggs.’ Thus should you stammer and praise your virtue.  Once you had passions and called them evil.  But now you have only your virtues: they grew from out your passions.  You laid your highest aim in the heart of these passions: then they became your virtues and joys.  And though you came from the race of the hot-tempered or of the lustful or of the fanatical or of the vindictive: At last all your passions have become virtues and all your devils angels.  Once you had fierce dogs in your cellar: but they changed at last into birds and sweet singers.  From your poison you brewed your balsam; you milked your cow, affliction, now you drink the sweet milk of her udder.  And henceforward nothing evil shall come out of you, except it be the evil that comes from the conflict of your virtues.  My brother, if you are lucky you will have one virtue and no more: thus you will go more easily over the bridge.  To have many virtues is to be distinguished, but it is a hard fate; and many a man has gone into the desert and killed himself because he was tired of being a battle and battleground of virtues.  My brother, are war and battle evil? But this evil is necessary, envy and mistrust and calumny among your virtues is necessary.  Behold how each of your virtues desires the highest place: it wants your entire spirit, that your spirit may be its herald, it wants your entire strength in anger, hate, and love.  Every virtue is jealous of the others, and jealousy is a terrible thing.  Even virtues can be destroyed through jealousy.  He whom the flames of jealousy surround at last turns his poisoned sting against himself, like the scorpion.  Ah my brother, have you never yet seen a virtue turn upon itself and stab itself? Man is something that must be overcome: and for that reason you must love your virtues – for you will perish by them.  Thus spoke Zarathustra.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra CHRONOLOGY 1844 15 October.  Friedrich Wilhekn Nietzsche born in the parsonage at Rocken, near Lützen, Germany, the first of three children of Karl Ludwig, the village pastor, and Fraziska Nietzsche, daughter of the pastor of a nearby village.  1849 27 July.  Nietzsche’ father dies.  1850 The Nietzsche family moves to Naumberg, in Thuringia, in April.  Arthur Schopenhauer publishes Essays, Aphorisms and Maxims .  1856 Birth of Freud.  1858 The family moves to No.  18 Weingarten.  Nietzsche wins a place at the prestigious Pforta grammar school.  1860 Forms a literary society, ‘Germania’, with two Naumberg friends.  Jacob Burckhardt publishes The Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy .  1864 Enters Bonn University as a student of theology and philology.  1865 At Easter, Nietzsche abandons the study of theology having lost his Christian belief.  Leaves Bonn for Leipzig, following his former tutor of philology, Friedrich Ritschl.  Begins to read Schopenhauer.  1867 First publication, ‘Zur Geschichte der Theognideischen Spruchsammlung’ (The History of the Theognidia Collection) in the Rheinische Museum fir Philiogie .  Begins military service.  1868 Discharged from the army.  Meets Richard Wagner.  1869 Appointed to the chair of classical philology at Basle University having been recommended by Ritschl.  Awarded a doctorate by Leipzig.  Regular visitor at Wagners’ home in Tribschen.  1870 Delivers public lectures on The Greek Music Drama’ and ‘Socrates and Tragedy’.  Serves as a medical orderly with the Prussian army where he is taken ill with diphtheria.  1871 Applies unsuccessfully for the chair of philology at Basle.  His health deteriorates.  Takes leave to recover and works on The Birth of Tragedy.  1872 The Birth of Tragedy published (January).  Public lectures ‘On the Future of our Educational Institutions’.  1873 Untimely Meditations I: David Strauss published.  1874 Untimely Meditations II: On the Use and Disadvantage of History for Life and III: Schopenhauer as Educator published.  1875 Meets Peter Gast, who is to become his earliest ‘disciple’.  Suffers from ill-health leading to a general collapse at Christmas.  1876 Granted a long absence from Basle due to continuing ill-health.  Proposes marriage to Mathilde Trampedach but is rejected.  Untimely Meditations IV: Richard Wagner in Bayreuth published.  Travels to Italy.  1878 Human, All Too Human published.  His friendship with the Wagners comes to an end.  1879 Assorted Opinions and Maxims published.  Retires on a pension from Basle due to sickness.  1880 The Wanderer and his Shadow and Human, All Too Human II published.  1881 Dawn published.  1882 The Gay Science published.  Proposes to Lou Andreas Salome and is rejected.  1883 13 February.  Wagner dies in Venice.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra I and II published.  1884 Thus Spoke Zarathustra HI published.  1885 Zarathustra IV privately printed.  1886 Beyond Good and Evil published .  1887 On the Genealogy of Morals published.  1888 The Wagner Case published.  First review of his work as a whole published in the Bern Bund .  Experiences some improvement in health but this is short-lived.  1889 Suffers mental collapse in Turin and is admitted to a psychiatric clinic at the University of Jena.  Twilight of the Idols published and Nietzsche contra Wagner privately printed.  1890 Nietzsche returns to his mother’ home.  1891 Dithyrambs of Dionysus published.  1894 The Anti-Christ published.  The ‘Nietzsche Archive’ founded by his sister, Elisabeth.  1895 Nietzsche contra Wagner published.  1897 20 April.  Nietzsche’s mother dies; and Elisabeth moves Nietzsche to Weimar.  1900 25 August Nietzsche dies.  Freud publishes Interpretation of Dreams.  1901 Publication of The Will to Power , papers selected by Elisabeth and Peter Gast.  1908 Ecce Homo published.  Thus Spoke Zarathustra The Stillest Hour W HAT has happened to me, my friends? You behold me troubled, driven forth, unwillingly obedient, ready to go – alas, to go away from you ! Yes, Zarathustra must go into his solitude once again: but this time the bear goes unhappily back into his cave! What has happened to me? Who has ordered this? – alas, my mistress will have it so, so she told me; have I ever told you her name? Yesterday towards evening my stillest hour spoke to me: that is the name of my terrible mistress.  And thus it happened, for I must tell you everything, that your hearts may not harden against me for departing so suddenly! Do you know the terror which assails him who is falling asleep? He is terrified down to his toes, because the ground seems to give way, and the dream begins.  I tell you this in a parable.  Yesterday, at the stillest hour, the ground seemed to give way: my dream began.  The hand moved, the dock of my life held its breath – I had never heard such stillness about me: so that my heart was terrified.  Then, voicelessly, something said to me: ‘ You know, Zarathustra? ’ And I cried out for terror at this whisper, and the blood drained from my face: but I kept silent.  Then again, something said to me voicelessly: ‘You know, Zarathustra, but you do not speak!’ And I answered at last defiantly: ‘Yes, I know, but I will not speak!’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘You will not, Zarathustra? Is this true? Do not hide yourself in your defiance!’ And I wept and trembled like a child and said: ‘Alas, I want to, but how can I? Release me from this alone! It is beyond my strength!’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘Of what consequence are you, Zarathustra? Speak your teaching and break!’ And I answered: ‘Ah, is it my teaching? Who am I ? I await one who is more worthy; I am not worthy even to break by it.’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘Of what consequence are you? You are not yet humble enough.  Humility has the toughest hide.’ And I answered: ‘What has the hide of my humility not already endured? I live at the foot of my heights: how high are my peaks? No one has yet told me.  But I know my valleys well.’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘O Zarathustra, he who has to move mountains moves valleys and low-lands too.’ And I answered: ‘My words have as yet moved no mountains and what I have spoken has not reached men.  Indeed, I went to men, but I have not yet attained them.’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘How do you know that ? The dew falls upon the grass when the night is at its most silent.’ And I answered: ‘They mocked me when I found and walked my own way; and in truth my feet trembled then.  ‘And they spoke thus to me: You have forgotten the way, now you will also forget how to walk!’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘Of what consequence is their mockery? You are one who has unlearned how to obey: now you shall command! ‘Do you know what it is all men most need? Him who commands great things.  ‘To perform great things is difficult: but more difficult is to command great things.  ‘This is the most unpardonable thing about you: You have the power and you will not rule.’ And I answered: ‘I lack the lion’s voice for command.’ Then again something said to me as in a whisper: ‘It is the stillest words which bring the storm.  Thoughts that come on doves’ feet guide the world.  ‘O Zarathustra, you shall go as a shadow of that which must come: thus you will command and commanding lead the way.’ And I answered: ‘I am ashamed.’ Then again something said to me voicelessly: ‘You must yet become a child and without shame.  ‘The pride of youth is still in you, you have become young late: but he who wants to become a child must overcome even his youth.’ And I considered long and trembled.  At last, however, I said what I had said at first: ‘I will not.’ Then a laughing broke out around me.  Alas, how this laughing tore my body and ripped open my heart! And for the last time something said to me: ‘O Zarathustra, your fruits are ripe but you are not ripe for your fruits! ‘So you must go back into solitude: for you shall yet grow mellow.’ And again something laughed, and fled: then it grew still round me as if with a twofold stillness.  I, however, lay on the ground and the sweat poured from my limbs.  Now you have heard everything, and why I must return to my solitude.  I have kept nothing back from you, my friends.  And you have heard, too, who is the most silent of men – and intends to remain so! Ah, my friends! I should have something more to tell you, I should have something more to give you! Why do I not give it? Am I then mean? When Zarathustra had said these words, however, the violence of his grief and the nearness of his departure from his friends overwhelmed him, so that he wept aloud; and no one knew how to comfort him.  But that night he went away alone and forsook his friends.  Simon & Schuster Front Sign-up Page Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster ebook.  Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list.  Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster.  Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read.  You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.  Contents Contents Cover Title Page Foreword Translator’s Preface to the US Edition Note on Abbreviations Translator’s Introduction Notes on the Translation Translator’s Acknowledgments Introduction: In Search of Being I.  The Idea of the Phenomenon II.  The Phenomenon of Being and the Being of the Phenomenon III.  The Prereflective ‘Cogito’ and the Being of the ‘Percipere’ IV.  The Being of the ‘Percipi’ V.  The Ontological Proof VI.  Being in Itself Part One: The Problem of Nothingness Chapter 1: The Origin of Negation I.  Questioning II.  Negations III.  The Dialectical Conception of Nothingness IV.  The Phenomenological Conception of Nothingness V.  The Origin of Nothingness Chapter 2: Bad Faith I.  Bad Faith and Lies II.  Forms of Bad Faith III.  The “Faith” of Bad Faith Part Two: Being-For-Itself Chapter 1: The Immediate Structures of the For-Itself I.  Self-Presence II.  The For-Itself’s Facticity III.  The For-Itself and the Being of Value IV.  The For-Itself and the Being of Possibles V.  My Self and the Circuit of Ipseity Chapter 2: Temporality I.  Phenomenology of the Three Temporal Dimensions II.  The Ontology of Temporality III.  Original Temporality and Psychological Temporality: Reflection Chapter 3: Transcendence I.  Knowledge as a Type of Relation between the For-Itself and the In-Itself II.  On Determination as Negation III.  Quality and Quantity, Potentiality and Equipmentality IV.  World-Time V.  Knowledge Part Three: Being-for-the-Other Chapter 1: The Other’s Existence I.  The Problem II.  The Reef of Solipsism III.  Husserl, Hegel, Heidegger IV.  The Look Chapter 2: The Body I.  The Body as Being-for-Itself: Facticity II.  The Body-for-the-Other III.  The Third Ontological Dimension of the Body Chapter 3: Concrete Relations with the Other I.  Our First Attitude Toward the Other: Love, Language, Masochism II.  The Second Attitude Toward the Other: Indifference, Desire, Hatred, Sadism III.  “Being-With” (‘Mitsein’) and the “We’ Part Four: To Have, To Do, and To Be Chapter 1: Being and Doing: Freedom I.  The First Condition of Action is Freedom II.  Freedom and Facticity: The Situation III.  Freedom and Responsibility Chapter 2: To Do and To Have I.  Existential Psychoanalysis II.  To Do and To Have: Possession III.  The Revelation of Being Through Qualities Conclusion I.  In-Itself and For-Itself: Some Metaphysical Observations II.  Moral Perspectives About the Author Bibliography Index Copyright Guide Cover Start of Content Title Page Foreword Introduction About the Author Bibliography Index Copyright I II III IV V VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX XXI XXII XXIII XXIV XXV XXVI XXVII XXVIII XXIX XXX XXXI XXXII XXXIII XXXIV XXXV XXXVI XXXVII XXXVIII XXXIX XL XLI XLII XLIII XLIV XLV XLVI XLVII XLVIII XLIX L LI LII LIII LIV LV LVI LVII LVIII LIX LX LXI LXII LXIII LXIV LXV LXVI LXVII LXVIII LXIX LXX LXXI LXXII LXXIII LXXIV 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 401 402 403 404 405 406 407 408 409 410 411 412 413 414 415 416 417 418 419 420 421 422 423 424 425 426 427 428 429 430 431 432 433 434 435 436 437 438 439 440 441 442 443 444 445 446 447 448 449 450 451 452 453 454 455 456 457 458 459 460 461 462 463 464 465 466 467 468 469 470 471 472 473 474 475 476 477 478 479 480 481 482 483 484 485 486 487 488 489 490 491 492 493 494 495 496 497 498 499 500 501 502 503 504 505 506 507 508 509 510 511 512 513 514 515 516 517 518 519 520 521 522 523 524 525 526 527 528 529 530 531 532 533 534 535 536 537 538 539 540 541 542 543 544 545 546 547 548 549 550 551 552 553 554 555 556 557 558 559 560 561 562 563 564 565 566 567 568 569 570 571 572 573 574 575 576 577 578 579 580 581 582 583 584 585 586 587 588 589 590 591 592 593 594 595 596 597 598 599 600 601 602 603 604 605 606 607 608 609 610 611 612 613 614 615 616 617 618 619 620 621 622 623 624 625 626 627 628 629 630 631 632 633 634 635 636 637 638 639 640 641 642 643 644 645 646 647 648 649 650 651 652 653 654 655 656 657 658 659 660 661 662 663 664 665 666 667 668 669 670 671 672 673 674 675 676 677 678 679 680 681 682 683 684 685 686 687 688 689 690 691 692 693 694 695 696 697 698 699 700 701 702 703 704 705 706 707 708 709 710 711 712 713 714 715 716 717 718 719 720 721 722 723 724 725 726 727 728 729 730 731 732 733 734 735 736 737 738 739 740 741 742 743 744 745 746 747 748 749 750 751 752 753 754 755 756 757 758 759 760 761 762 763 764 765 766 767 768 769 770 771 772 773 774 775 776 777 778 779 780 781 782 783 784 785 786 787 788 789 790 791 792 793 794 795 796 797 798 799 800 801 802 803 804 805 806 807 808 809 810 811 812 813 814 815 816 817 818 819 820 821 822 823 824 825 826 827 828 829 830 831 832 833 834 835 836 837 838 839 840 841 842 843 844 845 846 847 848 849 850 851 852 853 854 Foreword F OREWORD Richard Moran With this new translation by Sarah Richmond, Sartre’s major work L’Être et le Néant is available to the English-speaking world as never before.  Not only is the translation itself a great improvement in accuracy and readability on the Hazel Barnes version published in 1956 but the Translator’s Introduction and Notes on the Translation illuminate this difficult text for both earlier readers of Sartre and those encountering this book for the first time.  The inadequacies of the Barnes translation have been widely recognized for a long time, but it is always difficult to launch a new translation of a well-known work that is still selling, and in this case the scope of the task was especially daunting.  The world of philosophy in English has reason to be grateful to Richmond and the people at Routledge for seeing this through.  *** *** *** Jean-Paul Sartre was born in 1905 in Paris.  He had already published a few short stories when he entered the École Normale Supérieure in 1924, where he met Simone de Beauvoir, who remained a companion for life and whose influence on Being and Nothingness , while difficult to determine, was no doubt considerable.  Like most young French philosophers at the time, he was influenced by the work of Henri Bergson and by the neo-Kantianism represented by Léon Brunschvicg, but he had already conceived for himself the dream of a manner of writing that would be literary and philosophical at once.  It was in 1932 that he had the famous meeting in a café with Raymond Aron, when Aron was back visiting Paris during the year he was spending at the Institut Français in Berlin, learning about the new philosophy called “phenomenology.” As Beauvoir tells the story in The Prime of Life , We ordered the specialty of the house, apricot cocktails.  Aron said, pointing to his glass: “You see, my dear fellow, if you were a phenomenologist, you could talk about this cocktail glass and make philosophy out of it.” Sartre turned pale with emotion at this.  Here was just the thing he had been longing to achieve for years—to describe objects just as he saw and touched them, and extract philosophy from the process.  1 Aron helped Sartre obtain a fellowship in Berlin for the following year, where he immersed himself in Husserl and Heidegger, and wrote his critique of Husserl, The Transcendence of the Ego , and the bulk of his first novel Nausea (published respectively in 1937 and 1938).  Both works attracted considerable attention, but Sartre’s budding fame was cut short by the German invasion of Poland in 1939 and the general mobilization in France.  Sartre was called up and was captured by the Germans in 1940 and transferred to a prisoner-of-war camp in Trier.  He does not describe his time there as having been harsh, and he seems to have spent most of his days teaching philosophy to fellow prisoners and working on the voluminous notebooks in which he sketched out the plan for his big book Being and Nothingness .  After managing to get himself released in 1941, he returned to occupied Paris, where he sought unsuccessfully to form a resistance group independent of the Gaullists and the Communists.  For the remainder of the war he was by his own account an “intellectual resistant,” and concentrated on finishing his magnum opus.  It was published by Gallimard in 1943, at 722 pages weighing precisely one kilogram, which (if Jean Paulhan is to be believed) helped with the initial sales, since the book was being used as a weight measure at home when the normal brass weights had been confiscated by the German authorities.  What sort of book is this, and what is its philosophical importance now? Any account of its importance and genuine brilliance has to come to grips with the several different forms of obstacle to its reception today, both those intrinsic to the book and those stemming from the contemporary intellectual context.  Part of the problem is simply Sartre’s own fame and the cultural saturation that was part of the reception of “existentialism” in France from the beginning.  In the Paris of the 1950s something called “existentialism” was not merely a school of philosophy but an entire lifestyle, encompassing literature, music, film, and a succession of political stances.  This broad influence was amplified by the fact that, in France as elsewhere, the postwar years were also the beginning of the first age of mass media and a new prominence of “youth culture” in European and American life.  Sartre’s own personality as provocateur and intellectuel engagé lent itself to this context.  He was on television almost as soon as television came to France, and was perhaps the first major philosopher to have his own radio show.  In the decades following the war in France he was rarely without an opinion or an opportunity for publishing it.  And of course he threw himself into the various political crises of his day, creating a certain notoriety and gaining enemies among both the Catholic right and the Communist left in France.  The result of this cultural saturation is that today everyone is entitled to an opinion about Sartrean existentialism, however minimal one’s exposure to his writing may be.  This presence as cultural reference is itself unusual for a philosopher and is an aspect of how his enduring fame is maintained even by his detractors.  All philosophers wax and wane in their influence, and most can enjoy a posthumous existence in comfortable obscurity, but Sartre stands out among the notable twentieth-century philosophers for the extent to which he is still invoked for condescension, seen less as a philosopher than as a provocation to be put down both in intellectual circles and in the popular media.  Another obstacle is the sheer length and the style of Being and Nothingness .  It can be an impossible and infuriating text; one can only dream wistfully of what a ruthless editor might have been able to do with its bulk.  The tone is often abrupt and peremptory, with little or no explanation given to key philosophical terms, whether German or French.  In a manner that we have become used to among certain philosophers, it is as though the presumed audience for the work could only be those for whom such things as the distinction between “the phenomenon of being and the being of the phenomenon” is always already quite familiar, and we are being invited to appreciate the unexpected spin the brilliant author is putting on these old ideas.  It is extremely uneven as a piece of philosophical writing.  Sometimes we do indeed get what look very much like arguments—powerful ones—and other times Sartre puts his powers of description to genuinely illuminating use, but too often we get bold declarations, invidious distinctions, and a fondness for paradoxical formulation that seems to know no bounds.  Sartre himself paid a price for the difficulty of access of Being and Nothingness , in the fact that readers who were curious but not prepared to take on the 722 pages of the original had available to them a much shorter Sartrean text—a pamphlet, really—called Existentialism Is a Humanism , something dashed off and never intended for publication in the first place.  In October 1945, in the early months of the Liberation, Sartre was persuaded by a friend to give what was to be a small public lecture on the new philosophy at the Club Maintenant.  It turned into a huge event, with an overflow crowd and people being carried out after having fainted from the heat and overcrowding.  Sartre spoke without notes.  To help pay for the rental of the hall and the damage to the premises, the organizer prevailed upon Sartre to agree to publish a version of his remarks for sale, which he agreed to.  As a text it is full of crudities, misstatements, and willful exaggerations for effect, and soon became far and away the most famous and widely read piece he ever wrote.  It is still commonly cited as representative of Sartrean existentialism by philosophers who should know better.  A final obstacle to be mentioned is that so much of French thought since the 1960s and 1970s has proceeded from an assumed repudiation of Sartre.  Being and Nothingness is, among other things, the last great expression of the “philosophy of the subject” that later French thought has expended so much energy in dismantling and decentering.  Both structuralist (originally in the person of Claude Lévi-Strauss) and post-structuralist thinkers such as Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, and Jacques Lacan begin by repudiating the Cartesian starting point of so many of the reflections in Being and Nothingness , as well as Sartre’s appropriation of phenomenology and early Heidegger.  All of this is further reason to welcome this new translation and the opportunity it gives readers in English to encounter this book with fresh eyes, for despite its flaws it is still one of the great and engaging texts of twentieth-century philosophy.  It is a text to struggle with, yes, but when the writing is at its best it is rewarding and illuminating in ways that few major works of philosophy in the modern world can touch.  Of course like any philosophical text it needs to be comprehended as a whole, but many of its famous sections (on bad faith, on the look of the Other, on various self-defeating strategies of love and desire, on freedom and responsibility, on the “existential psychoanalysis” of qualities) can be profitably read by themselves.  Today it is easy to forget how daring this text is, and the different ways Sartre expanded the possible forms of philosophical writing.  This new edition makes this available to a new generation of readers.  Different philosophers will have different reasons for engaging with Being and Nothingness today.  From the perspective of the history of philosophy it may be read as a remarkably ambitious attempt to inherit the phenomenology of Husserl and the early work of Heidegger, in the context of a general metaphysical picture of the world and the place of human thought and action within it.  Today one may be skeptical about the very idea of such a general metaphysical picture, and in particular the dualism of “being as such” and “nothingness,” and yet still be impressed with the creative use to which it is put and how Sartre is able to begin from these bare categories to an analysis of the difference between the categories of ordinary objects (“being-in-itself”) and the categories of human life (“being-for-itself”).  Despite rumors to the contrary, the idea of “nothingness” here has little to do with despair or the contemplation of suicide.  Rather, the idea of the negative is bound up with the most basic abilities to describe the world and pick out and discriminate objects themselves (Sartre never tires of alluding to Spinoza’s formulation “ Omnis determinatio est negatio ”).  At the same time the fundamental power of thought to negate, to assert difference, is also something that he seeks to derive from Husserl’s basic thought about consciousness (itself an idea associated with Brentano): consciousness is pure relatedness to an object, which is to say something other than itself, something it is not.  Consciousness just is this basic capacity for relatedness to the world and the distinguishing of itself from the world it is directed upon.  This assertion of difference is described as part of the “nihilating” action of consciousness, which enables Sartre to forge his unbreakable connection between consciousness (as “for-itself”) and freedom, in action and in thought.  For in the same way that a picture of the world as consisting purely of “positive reality” cannot account for the ability to grasp or even perceive the “negative” truth of, for instance, an object’s being fragile (breakable but not broken), or different from another one, or no longer what it once was (not to mention Pierre’s absence from the café), so understanding human action requires the “negative” modes of thought involved in being underway with an action not yet completed, and in the capacity to step back from or “posit one’s freedom” with respect to one’s currently constituted motives and one’s past (one’s “facticity”).  The “stepping back” or “putting one’s past out of play” is the same nihilating capacity of consciousness, the capacity to distinguish, hold oneself separate from the facticity of what the world has made of one so far, and raise the question for oneself of how one is to relate oneself to this positive reality from here on.  It is along these lines that we can see that some of Sartre’s most provocative formulations are no mere paradox-mongering: the human being “is what it is not” (in the sense that, as agent, I am my relation to my unrealized possibilities, the action I am embarked on but have not completed) and “is not what it is” (in the sense that in adopting the standpoint of freedom to my possibilities I posit my difference from my past and the facticities of my situation, which make up what I am so far).  Here as elsewhere Sartre’s borrowings are as undeniable as the boldness and originality of his use of them.  Are the notions of “negation,” “nothingness,” and “difference” being stretched here to do too many different kinds of work as we move from the more purely metaphysical structure of the world to the story of action and human subjectivity? No doubt that is a question one may and should press throughout the reading of Being and Nothingness , but what remains impressive is the richness and diversity of the phenomenon that Sartre manages in this way to bring into philosophical contact with each other, the new questions this orientation makes possible.  The same vaulting ambition that takes him from the ancient Parmenidean problem of how there can be “thought about what is not,” to the object-directedness of thought (“intentionality”), to a distinctive perspective on human freedom is also what helps us formulate new questions about how the appeal to freedom can be genuinely explanatory of human action, and how we should understand the relation between the intentionality of thought and the intentionality of action, and hence the understanding of action itself as a form of thought.  Being and Nothingness is not only about human freedom, it is a text that is plainly obsessed with the question of freedom and its meaning, and organizes all its many topics around it.  In relation to freedom it is less concerned about solving the traditional problem of freedom and determinism and more concerned about understanding what is contained in the ordinary assumption of human freedom and the variety of ways it manifests itself.  Part of Sartre’s great originality here is in his drive to find the question of freedom not only in, say, the conditions for holding people accountable but virtually everywhere in human life, in the inescapability of some answer I give to how I relate myself to my past as well as my future, to the forms of intersubjectivity and what it is that is aimed at in seeking the desire or recognition of another person, in the conflicting demands of the first-person and third-person points of view in understanding oneself.  What is sometimes criticized as the unboundedness of Sartre’s conception of human freedom is a reflection of the fact that the place of freedom in his system is less that of a human capacity among others and more that of a principle of intelligibility of human affairs quite generally.  Sartre is of course a novelist and playwright as well as a philosopher, and part of the originality of Being and Nothingness as a piece of writing lies in the combination of an abstract and austere metaphysical picture with an essentially dramatic sense of the source of philosophical questions as they exhibit themselves in recognizable human situations.  One of his great topics is that of the question of the forms of comprehensibility of human life, and of an individual human life taken as a whole (especially in his later books on Genet and Flaubert).  He is properly and profitably struck by the contradictory demands we place on the comprehensibility of human life and action, and by the question of the priority of different forms of comprehensibility we demand of ourselves and others.  The metaphysics of the in-itself and the for-itself, or the self-as-facticity and the self-as-transcendence, will have earned its philosophical keep if they are what bring into view and make available for thought what Sartre takes up in the sections of Being and Nothingness on bad faith, on the nature of shame and the self-consciousness that pertains to it, on the encounter with the Other through “the look,” on the internal conflicts of love and desire.  Despite how long Being and Nothingness has been a looming presence on the philosophical scene, much of it is only recently getting the attention it deserves in the anglophone world.  Sartre’s long chapter on “The body” is one of the first extended philosophical meditations in the modern era on that meaning of one’s identity with a certain living body, and is beginning to attract new attention today.  And his reflections on the different forms of self-consciousness (“thetic” or “positional” versus “non-thetic” or “non-positional,” as originally developed in his short work The Transcendence of the Ego ) are entering into contemporary discussions on the nature of self-knowledge and the first-person point of view.  In many ways, Sartre is as present on the scene as ever, but even in that presence we can see him still struggling with his fame, and his life and personality somehow continue to exert a fascination out of balance with attention to the works that are supposedly the reason for any special interest in the details of this man’s life.  With new biographies of Sartre appearing every few years, and words like “existential” being part of every pundit’s vocabulary, this new translation makes this an opportune time to go back to the source and see what it’s all about.  1 Simone de Beauvoir (1962), The Prime of Life , trans.  Peter Green (Harmondsworth: Penguin), p.  135.  Translator’s Preface to the US Edition T RANSLATOR’S P REFACE TO THE US E DITION Sarah Richmond It’s been more than three years since my translation of Being and Nothingness was first published, by Routledge, in the UK in the summer of 2018.  I had hoped that North American readers might not have to wait so long, but a complicated situation involving rights ownership had first to be resolved.  I’m delighted that the book is now available to a wider public.  A few revisions to the 2018 edition have been made.  Spelling and punctuation have been Americanized.  Sartre’s imaginary character on p.  361 , for example, now has a “flashlight” at his possible disposal, rather than a “torch,” and a person who formerly walked on the “pavement” now finds himself on the “sidewalk.” The new copyediting process has also allowed a number of typos from the original to be corrected, as well as a small number of errors that had come to my attention.  I thank Peter Borland and Benjamin Holmes at Simon & Schuster for overseeing the production process.  Some further thanks are also due to the UK editors of the journal Sartre Studies International , John Gillespie and Katherine Morris, for publishing an excellent symposium on my translation in 2020 (volume 26, issue 1); and to the two contributing Sartre scholars, Matthew Eshleman and Adrian van den Hoven, for their careful and illuminating discussion, to which some of the recent corrections are owed.  I gratefully acknowledge the helpful professional advice of my lawyer, Bernie Nyman, and the UK Society of Authors.  Last, a shout-out to Daniel Rothschild, my line manager in 2018, who generously marked the publication of this translation by organizing a celebratory, most happy event in the philosophy department at University College London.  Sarah Richmond London 2021 Chapter 2: To Do and To Have Chapter 2 GT602 TO DO AND TO HAVE I.  EXISTENTIAL PSYCHOANALYSIS If, as we have tried to establish, it is true that human-reality becomes acquainted with itself and defines itself through the ends it pursues, an investigation and a classification of these ends becomes indispensable.  In fact, in our last chapter, we examined the for-itself only in relation to its free project, which is to say the impulse through which it throws itself toward its end.  We ought now to ask about this end itself, because it forms part of absolute subjectivity, as its transcendent and objective limit.  This was glimpsed by empirical psychology, which allows that a particular man is defined by his desires.  But here we should guard against two mistakes: first of all, by defining man in terms of his desires, the empirical psychologist remains a victim of the substantialist illusion.  He sees desire as being in the man, as the “content” of his consciousness, and he believes that the desire’s meaning lies inherent within the desire itself.  In this way he avoids anything that might evoke the idea of transcendence.  But if I desire a house, a glass of water, a woman’s body, how can this body, this glass, or this building reside within my desire, and how can my desire be anything other than a consciousness of these objects as desirable? We must therefore be careful not to conceive of desires as little psychological entities inhabiting consciousness: they are consciousness itself, in its original pro-jective and transcending structure, insofar as it is necessarily conscious of something.  The other mistake is closely connected to the first; it consists in taking psychological investigation to be finished once we have reached the concrete set of empirical desires.  In this way, a man can be said to be defined by the bundle of tendencies that empirical observation has been able to establish.  Naturally the psychologist will not confine himself always to finding the sum of these tendencies: he will enjoy bringing to light their similarities, affinities, and harmonies; he will aim to present the set of desires as a synthetic organization, in which each desire acts upon and influences the others.  A critic, for example, wishing to undertake Flaubert’s “psychology,” writes that he seems in his early youth to have felt as his normal state a continual exaltation, made up of the twofold feeling of his grandiose ambition and his invincible strength.… Therefore the exhilaration in his young blood turned into a passion for literature, as often happens to precocious souls when they approach the age of eighteen and discover in the energy of style, or the intensities of fiction, how to deceive the need for plenty of action, or an excess of feeling, which torments them.  1 There is an attempt, in this passage, to reduce an adolescent’s complex personality to a few primary desires, in the way in which a chemist reduces compound substances to being only a combination of pure elements.  These primary data will be the grandiose ambition, and the need for plenty of action and an excess of feeling; these elements, when they are combined, produce a permanent state of exaltation.  This latter, being nourished—as Bourget observes in some sentences that we did not quote—by much reading of well-chosen texts, will attempt to deceive itself, by expressing itself in fictions that will channel it and symbolically satisfy it.  And here we have, in outline, the genesis of a literary “temperament.” But, in the first place, this kind of psychological analysis starts from the premise that an individual fact is produced by the intersection of abstract and universal laws.  The fact to be explained—which in this case is the young Flaubert’s literary dispositions—is resolved into a combination of typical and abstract desires, as we might encounter them in “the adolescent in general.” Here, what is concrete is only their combination; in themselves they are only schemata.  By hypothesis, therefore, the abstract is prior to the concrete and the concrete is only an organization of abstract qualities; the individual is only the intersection of universal schemata.  But—in addition to the logical absurdity of such a premise—we can clearly see, in the example we have chosen, that it fails to explain precisely what gives the pro-ject we are considering its individuality.  The fact that “the need to feel excessively”—a universal schema—deceives itself and becomes channeled through the need to write is not an explanation of Flaubert’s “vocation”; on the contrary, it is what needs to be explained.  Of course we may invoke a thousand slender circumstances, unknown to us, which have shaped this need to feel into a need to act.  But, in the first place, this abandons any explanation and falls back precisely on something undetectable.  2 Furthermore, it displaces what is purely individual—which is banished from Flaubert’s subjectivity—into the external circumstances of his life.  Finally, Flaubert’s correspondence proves that from his earliest childhood, long before his “adolescent crisis,” Flaubert was tormented by the need to write.  At each stage of the aforementioned description we encounter a gap.  Why do ambition and the feeling of his strength produce in Flaubert a state of exaltation rather than calm expectation or gloomy impatience? Why does this exaltation become particularized into a need to act too much and to feel too much? Or, rather, what is this need doing here, at the end of the paragraph, where—through a process of spontaneous generation—it has suddenly appeared? And why precisely does it choose to be symbolically satisfied, rather than seeking fulfillment in acts of violence, love affairs, debauchery, or by running away? And why is this symbolic satisfaction, which does not moreover have to be artistic (for example, there is also mysticism), found in writing , rather than in painting or music? “I could have been,” Flaubert writes somewhere, “a great actor.” Why didn’t he try to be one? In brief, we have understood nothing; we have seen a succession of accidents, of desires, each of which emerges fully armed against the others, without any possibility of grasping their genesis.  The transitions , becomings, and transformations have been carefully hidden, and the task of bringing order into this succession has been limited to an appeal to sequences that have been empirically observed (the need to act preceding, in the case of the adolescent, the need to write) but which, taken literally, are unintelligible.  And yet that is what we call “psychology.” Open a biography at random and that is the kind of description you will find in it, more or less mixed up with accounts of external events and allusions to the great explanatory idols of our age: heredity, education, social background, physiological constitution.  Sometimes, however—in the better books—the connection established between the antecedent and consequent, or between two concurrent and interacting desires, is not conceived merely in terms of the regularity of a sequence; sometimes it lends itself to “understanding,” in the sense intended by Jaspers in his general treatise of psychopathology.  3 But this understanding remains a series of general connections.  For example, the connection between chastity and mysticism, weakness and hypocrisy, might be perceived.  But we still do not know the concrete relation between this chastity ( this abstinence in relation to such and such a woman, this struggle against this precise temptation), and the individual content of the mysticism; moreover, this is exactly how psychiatry contents itself with bringing to light the general structures of delusions, and does not try to understand the individual and concrete content of psychoses (why this man believes that he is this historical character rather than any other, why his compensatory delusion 4 is satisfied by these notions of grandeur rather than by those others, etc.).  But, above all, these “psychological” explanations ultimately refer us to inexplicable basic givens.  These are psychology’s pure elements.  We are told, for example, that Flaubert had a “grandiose ambition,” and the aforementioned description rests entirely on this original ambition.  So be it.  But this ambition is an irreducible fact, and wholly unable to satisfy the intellect, since in this case the only reason for this irreducibility is a refusal to push the analysis any further.  At the point where the psychologist stops, the fact under consideration is presented as basic.  This is what explains the troubled state of resignation and dissatisfaction we are left with, when we read these psychological essays.  “There we are,” we say to ourselves, “Flaubert was ambitious.  He was like that.” To wonder why he was like that would be just as pointless as to try to find out why he was tall and blond: we have to stop somewhere; that is precisely the contingency of all real existence.  This rock is covered with moss, and the rock beside it is not.  Gustave Flaubert had literary ambitions and his brother Achille lacked them.  That is how it is.  In the same way, we wish to know the properties of phosphorus and attempt to reduce them to the structure of its component chemical molecules.  But why are there molecules of this type? That is how it is, and that’s all.  Flaubert’s psychology will consist in summing up, if it is possible, the complexity of his behavior, his feelings, and his tastes in terms of some properties , somewhat comparable to those of chemical substances, and beyond which it would be foolish to wish to go further.  And yet we have the obscure sense that Flaubert did not “receive” his ambition.  It is meaningful; therefore it is free.  It cannot be accounted for by heredity, or a bourgeois background, or education, still less by the physiological considerations about the “nervous temperament” that were fashionable for some time: a nerve is not significant ; it is a colloidal substance that has to be described in its own right, and which does not transcend itself in order to become acquainted, through other realities, with what it is.  In one sense Flaubert’s ambition is a fact with all its contingency—and it is true that it is impossible to reach further back, beyond the fact—but, in another, it makes itself, and our dissatisfaction serves us as a guarantee that we will be able to apprehend, beyond this ambition, something more, something like a radical decision which, without ceasing to be contingent, would be the truly irreducible psychological element.  What we require, therefore—and what nobody ever tries to give us—is a genuine irreducible, i.e., something irreducible whose irreducibility would be evident for us, which would be presented not as the psychologist’s premise and the result of his refusal or incapacity to go further but which we could note with a feeling of satisfaction.  And this requirement is not due, in our case, to that incessant pursuit of a cause, to that infinite regress which is often said to constitute rational investigation and which, in consequence, far from being specific to psychological inquiry, will be found in all disciplines and all problems.  It is not the childish search for a “because” that would not give way to a “why?”—but, on the contrary, it is a requirement founded in a preontological understanding of human-reality and in a related refusal to consider man as something that can be analyzed and reduced to basic givens, to determinate desires (or “tendencies”), supported by the subject in the way that an object supports its properties.  If in fact we are obliged to consider him in that way, we will have to choose: Flaubert the man, whom we may love or hate, blame or praise, who is for us the other , who directly attacks our own being merely by virtue of having existed, will be from the outset the unqualified substrate of these desires, i.e., a kind of indeterminate clay that passively receives them—or, alternatively, he will be reduced to the mere bundle of these irreducible tendencies.  In both cases the man disappears; we no longer meet “ him ,” to whom such and such an adventure happened : either, in seeking the person , we encounter a metaphysical substance, useless and contradictory, or, alternatively, the being we are looking for vanishes into a dust made up of phenomena interconnected by external relations.  Now, what each of us requires, in our very effort to understand the Other, is in the first place that we should never have to resort to this idea of substance, which is inhuman because it stays this side of the human.  And, next, it is that the being under consideration should, nonetheless, not crumble into dust, and that we should be able to find within it a unity (of which substance was only a caricature), that must be a unity of responsibility, a unity that we can love or hate, blame or praise—in brief, the unity of a person .  This unity, the being of the man under consideration, is a free unification .  And the unification cannot come after some diversity which it unifies.  Rather, for Flaubert, as for any subject of a “biography,” to be is to unify oneself within the world.  The irreducible unification that we need to encounter, which is Flaubert, and which we are asking the biographers to reveal to us, is therefore the unification of an original project , a unification that must be revealed to us in the form of a non-substantial absolute .  And so we must abjure any irreducible items and, by using as our criterion the evidence itself, continue our investigation until it is evident that we cannot and should not go any further.  In particular, we should not try to reconstitute a person out of his inclinations, any more than we should attempt, according to Spinoza, to reconstitute a substance or its attributes by adding together its modes.  Any desire that is presented as irreducible is absurdly contingent, and drags into absurdity human-reality taken as a whole.  If for example I declare that one of my friends “likes boating,” I deliberately propose to bring the investigation to an end there.  But, on the other hand, in doing this I constitute a contingent fact that nothing can explain and which, even if it has the gratuitous quality of a free decision, has none of its autonomy.  For I cannot regard this inclination toward boating as Pierre’s fundamental project; in itself it has a secondary and derivative quality.  Those who describe a personality in this way, by successive strokes, almost imply that each one of these strokes—each of the desires considered—is connected to the others by relations that are purely contingent and external.  Those who, on the contrary, attempt to explain this affective condition end up taking the path of what Comte called materialism , i.e., the explanation of the higher in terms of the lower.  It might be said, for example, that the subject being considered is “sporty,” that he enjoys exerting himself and, in addition, that he is a countryman who especially likes outdoor sports.  Thus, beneath the desire to be explained, we locate more general and less differentiated tendencies, which relate to it uniformly, in the way in which a zoological genus relates to the species.  In this way, psychological explanation (when it does not suddenly decide to come to a halt) sometimes places an emphasis on relations that consist purely of concurrence or constant succession and, at other times, offers a mere classification.  To explain Pierre’s inclination for boating is to regard it as a member of the family of inclinations for outdoor sports, and to connect this family with the family of tendencies toward sport in general.  Moreover, we can find categories which are even more general and impoverished, if we classify the taste for sport as one aspect of the love of risk—which can itself be presented as a particularization of the fundamental tendency toward games.  It is obvious that this so-called explanatory classification has no more value or interest than the classifications used in ancient botany: it rests on the assumption, as in those classifications, that the abstract has a priority of being in relation to the concrete: as if the tendency to play games existed first in a general form, and became particularized later—according to the circumstances—into the love of sport, this latter into an inclination toward boating and this last, finally, into the desire to row on this particular river, in these conditions and in this season—and, as with those classifications, it fails to explain the concrete enrichment, at every stage, of the abstract drive under consideration.  And yet how can we believe in a desire to row that is only a desire to row? Can we really accept that it should be reduced to being merely what it is? The most discerning of the moralists have illustrated the way in which desire surpasses itself; Pascal, for example, believed he had uncovered the need for diversion in hunting, in the jeu de paume 5 and in a hundred other pastimes—so that, within an activity that would, reduced to itself, be absurd, he revealed a meaning that transcends it, i.e., a reference to the reality of man in general, and his condition.  6 Similarly, have we not learned from Stendhal—in spite of his connection with the ideologues—and from Proust—in spite of his intellectualist and analytical tendencies—that love and jealousy cannot be reduced strictly to the desire to possess one woman but that they aim to take hold, through the woman, of the entire world? That is the meaning of Stendhal’s “crystallization,” and it is precisely for this reason that love, as Stendhal describes it, appears as a mode of being-in-the-world, i.e., as a fundamental relation of the for-itself to the world and to itself (ipseity), through some particular woman: the woman represents only a conducting element placed within the circuit.  7 These analyses may be inaccurate or incompletely true: nonetheless, they allow us to glimpse a method that differs from pure analytic description.  The same may be said about the observations of the Catholic novelists who immediately see, in carnal love, its surpassing toward God or, in Don Juan, “a man who is never satisfied” or, in sin, “a place empty of God.” 8 The task here is not to find something abstract behind the concrete: an impulse toward God is not less concrete than the impulse toward such and such a particular woman.  On the contrary, it is a matter of finding, beneath some partial and incomplete aspects of the subject, the genuine concretion—which can only be the totality of his impulse toward being, his original relation to himself, to the world and to the other, within the unity of internal relations and a fundamental project.  This impulse can only be purely individual and unique: rather than taking us away from the person (as in Bourget’s analysis, for example, which constitutes the individual by adding together general maxims), it will not lead us to find, underlying the need to write—and to write these books—a need for activity in general but, on the contrary, in rejecting with equal force both the theory of compliant clay and the theory of the bundle of tendencies, we will encounter the person in his constitutive initial project.  That is why the irreducibility of the result we arrive at will be disclosed as evident: not because it is the poorest and most abstract result but because it is the richest; here, what we grasp in intuition will be an individual plenitude.  The question that arises may, therefore, be put in roughly these terms: if we admit that the person is a totality, we cannot hope to recompose him through an addition or organization of the various tendencies that we have empirically uncovered in him.  Rather, and on the contrary, he is expressed in his entirety—although from a different angle—in each inclination, each tendency—rather as Spinoza’s substance is entirely expressed in each of its attributes.  If that is the case, we should be able to discover in each tendency of the subject, and each of his ways of behaving, a meaning that transcends it.  This particular jealousy, at its date , in which the subject is historialized in relation to a specific woman, signifies, in the eyes of somebody able to read it, the global relation to the world through which the subject is constituted as a “himself.” In other words, this empirical attitude is by itself the expression of the “choice of an intelligible character.” 9 And if that is the case, there is no mystery, and neither is there any intelligible plane that is merely able to be thought, while we can grasp and conceptualize only the plane of the subject’s empirical existence: if the empirical attitude signifies the choice of intelligible character, that is because it is itself this choice.  In fact the distinctive character of the intelligible choice—and we will return to this—is that it can exist only as the transcendent meaning of each concrete and empirical choice: it is not made in the first instance in some unconscious, or at the noumenal level, in order afterward to be expressed in this or that observable attitude; it does not even have ontological primacy in relation to the empirical choice but it is, as a matter of principle, something that must always be extricated from the empirical choice as its “beyond,” and as the infinity of its transcendence.  Thus if I am rowing on the river I am—either here or in any other world—nothing but my concrete boating pro-ject.  But this project itself, as the totality of my being, expresses my original choice in some particular circumstances; it is nothing but the choice of myself as a totality in these circumstances.  That is why a special method is needed in order to extricate this fundamental meaning attached to my choice, which can only be the individual secret of its being-in-the-world.  It is therefore by means of a comparison of a subject’s various empirical tendencies that we may attempt to discover and to isolate the fundamental project that they have in common, rather than merely by adding or reconstructing these tendencies: in each one of them, the person exists in his entirety.  Naturally, there are an infinite number of possible projects, just as there are an infinite number of possible men.  If we must nonetheless acknowledge certain characteristics that they hold in common and try to classify these within broader categories, we should first establish some individual investigations into the cases that lend themselves most easily to study.  In these investigations we will be guided by this principle: to stop only when we encounter something whose irreducibility is evident, i.e., never to believe that we have reached the initial project unless the projected end appears as the very being of the subject we are considering.  That is why we are unable to stop at classifications such as “authentic project” and “inauthentic project of oneself,” like the one Heidegger wants to establish.  10 Apart from the fact that such a classification is, despite its author, and even in its terminology, marred by an ethical concern, it is ultimately based on the subject’s attitude toward his own death.  But if death is a source of anguish—and if, in consequence, we can flee from anguish or throw ourselves resolutely into it—it is a truism to say that is because we are attached to life.  It follows that we cannot regard our anguish in the face of death, a resolute decision, and a flight into inauthenticity as fundamental projects of our being.  On the contrary, they can be understood only on the foundation of an initial project to live , i.e., on the basis of an original choice of our being.  In each case we ought, therefore, to reach beyond the results of Heidegger’s hermeneutic, toward a project that is still more fundamental.  And this fundamental project should not make reference to any other, and must be conceived on its own.  It cannot therefore be concerned with death, or life, or any particular characteristic of the human condition: a for-itself’s original project can aim only at its being ; indeed, the project of being, or desire to be, or tendency toward being, does not derive from some difference in physiology or empirical contingency; it cannot be distinguished, in fact, from the for-itself’s being.  That is because the for-itself is a being whose being is in question in its being in the form of a project of being.  To be for-itself is to become acquainted with what one is through a possible and in terms of a value.  The possible and the value belong to the for-itself’s being.  That is because the for-itself is described ontologically as a lack of being , and the possible belongs to the for-itself as what is missing from it , just as value haunts the for-itself as its missed totality of being.  What we expressed, in Part Two, in terms of a lack can be equally well expressed in terms of freedom .  The for-itself chooses because it is a lack: freedom is one and the same as the lack; it is the concrete mode of being of the lack of being.  Ontologically, therefore, it makes no difference whether we say that value and the possible exist as the internal limits of a lack of being that can exist only as a lack of being, or that freedom, in arising, determines its possible and thereby circumscribes its value.  Thus the point at which we can reach back no further, and where we meet something evidently irreducible, is the point when we reach the project of being : for evidently one can go no further back than being , and, between the project of being, the possible, value, and, on the other hand, being , there is no difference.  Man is fundamentally the desire to be , and the existence of this desire is not to be established through empirical induction; it comes out of an a priori description of the for-itself’s being, since desire is a lack and the for-itself is the being that is, in relation to itself, its own lack of being.  The original project that is expressed in each of our empirically observable tendencies is therefore the project of being ; or, alternatively, each empirical tendency relates to the original project of being as its expression and symbolic fulfillment—as conscious drives, in Freud’s view, relate to the complexes and the original libido.  Moreover the desire to be does not in any sense exist first , in order to become expressed afterward by the a posteriori desires; instead, it is nothing other than the symbolic expression it discovers within the particular desires.  There is not first one desire to be, and then a thousand particular feelings; rather, the desire to be only exists, and is only manifested, in and through our jealousy, avarice, love of art, cowardice, or courage, and the thousand empirical and contingent expressions in consequence of which human-reality only ever appears to us as manifested by such and such a man , by a particular person.  As for the being that is the object of this desire, we know a priori what it is.  The for-itself is the being that is, in relation to itself, its own lack of being.  And the being that is missing from the for-itself is the in-itself.  The for-itself arises as the nihilation of the in-itself, and this nihilation is defined as a pro-ject toward the in-itself: between the nihilated in-itself and the projected in-itself, the for-itself is a nothingness.  Thus the goal and the end of the nihilation that I am is the in-itself .  Thus human-reality is the desire to-be-in-itself.  But the in-itself that it desires cannot be pure in-itself, contingent and absurd, and comparable in every respect to the in-itself that it encounters and nihilates.  In fact, as we have seen, we can understand nihilation in terms of a rebellion on the part of the in-itself, which nihilates itself in opposition to its contingency.  To say that the for-itself exists its facticity—as we saw in the chapter about the body—is equivalent to saying that nihilation is a being’s futile endeavor to found its own being and that its withdrawal, in order to found it, is the source of the infinitesimal gap through which nothingness enters within being.  The being that is the object of the for-itself’s desire is, therefore, an in-itself that might relate to itself as its own foundation, i.e., an in-itself whose relation to its facticity would be like the for-itself’s relation to its motivations.  In addition, the for-itself—being the negation of the in-itself—cannot simply desire to return to the in-itself.  Here, as with Hegel, the negation’s negation cannot return us to our point of departure.  But, quite to the contrary, the reason why the for-itself lays claim to the in-itself is precisely the detotalized totality “in-itself nihilated into for-itself”; in other words, the for-itself’s project is to be as for-itself a being that is what it is; it is as a being that is what it is not and that is not what it is that the for-itself has the project to be what it is; it is as a consciousness that it wants to have the in-itself’s impermeability and infinite density; it is as the nihilation of the in-itself, and the constant escape from contingency and facticity, that it wants to be its own foundation.  That is why the possible is generally pro-jected as what is missing from the for-itself in order for it to become in-itself-for-itself; and the fundamental value presiding over this project is, precisely, the in-itself-for-itself, i.e., the ideal of a consciousness that could be the foundation of its own being-in-itself purely by means of its own being conscious of itself.  To this ideal, we can give the name “God.” So we can say that the best way to conceive of human-reality’s fundamental project is to regard man as the being whose project is to be God.  Whatever the myths and rites of any religion we may consider, God is in the first instance “felt by the heart” of man, heralding and defining him in his ultimate and fundamental project.  11 And if man possesses a preontological understanding of God’s being, it is not bestowed on him by nature’s grand spectacles or the power of society: but God, as the value and supreme goal of transcendence, represents the permanent limit in terms of which man becomes acquainted with what he is.  To be a man is to aim to be God; or, alternatively, man is fundamentally the desire to be God.  “But,” someone might say, “if that is the case, if man even as he arises points toward God as his limit, if he can choose only to be God, what becomes of freedom?” For freedom is nothing but a choice that creates its own possibilities for itself, whereas this initial project to be God by which man is “defined” seems here to verge on a human “nature” or “essence.” To this, our reply will be, precisely, that if desire’s meaning is in the last resort the project to be God, desire is never constituted by that meaning but represents on the contrary a particular discovery of its ends.  And the starting point for the pursuit of these ends is a particular empirical situation; indeed it is through this pursuit itself that the environment is constituted into a situation .  The desire to be is always actualized as the desire for a way of being.  And this desire for a way of being is, in turn, expressed as the meaning of the myriad concrete desires which constitute the fabric of our conscious life.  Thus we find ourselves confronted with symbolic architectures that are extremely complex and which have at least three levels.  Within empirical desire I may discern the symbolization of a fundamental and concrete desire which is the person , and which represents the way in which he has decided that being will be in question in his being; and, within the world, this fundamental desire in turn concretely expresses, in the particular situation in which the person is invested, an abstract and meaningful structure which is the desire to be in general, and which we must take to be human-reality in the person , which makes up his commonality with the others and allows us to claim that there is a truth about man, and not merely a set of incomparable individuals.  A state of absolute concreteness and wholeness, therefore, an existence in the form of a totality, belongs to the free and fundamental desire, or the person .  Empirical desire is only its symbolization.  It refers to it, and draws its meaning from it—while remaining at the same time something partial and reducible, because empirical desire is unable to be conceived by itself.  On the other hand, the desire to be, in its abstract purity, is the truth of the fundamental concrete desire, but it does not belong to the domain of the real.  Thus the fundamental project, or the person, or the free actualization of the truth of humanity, is omnipresent, and in every desire (with the restrictions mentioned in the previous chapter concerning, for example, “indifferents”): 12 we only ever grasp it through our desires—just as, even though space is a particular reality and not a concept, we are only able to grasp space through the bodies that inform it—or, alternatively, it is like Husserl’s object , which is only delivered to us through its “ Abschattungen ” and which, however, cannot be contained within any one Abschattung .  In the light of these remarks, we are able to see that, although the abstract and ontological structure instantiated by the “desire to be” may well represent the fundamental and human structure of the person, it cannot fetter his freedom.  Freedom—as we showed in the previous chapter—is equivalent in every respect to nihilation: the only being that we can describe as free is the being that nihilates its being.  Moreover, we know that nihilation is a lack of being and could not be otherwise.  Freedom is, precisely, the being that makes itself as a lack of being.  But as desire, as we have established, is identical to the lack of being, freedom can arise only as a being that makes itself the desire to be, i.e., as the project-for-itself of being in-itself-for-itself .  We arrive here at an abstract structure that cannot in any way be regarded as freedom’s nature or essence, because freedom is existence and existence, in it, precedes essence; freedom arises immediately as concrete and cannot be distinguished from its choice, i.e., from the person .  But the structure we are considering may be said to be freedom’s truth , which is to say that it is freedom’s human meaning.  It must be possible to establish the human truth of the person, as we have tried to do, by means of an ontological phenomenology—the nomenclature of empirical desires must be the object of a distinctively psychological investigation; we may use observation and induction and—if required—experimentation to draw up this list and to point out to the philosopher relations that can be understood, which may connect together various desires and actions, and to highlight certain concrete connections between “situations” that are defined in experimental terms (and which are only generated, basically, by restrictions that have been placed, for the sake of positivism, on the subject’s fundamental situation in the world) and the experimental subject.  But to establish and classify fundamental desires, or persons , neither of these two methods is suitable.  There can be no question in point of fact of our ascertaining a priori and ontologically something that appears with all the unpredictability of a free act.  And that is why we will restrict ourselves here to pointing out in very rough terms the possibilities of such an inquiry and its outlook: that it is possible to submit any man to an inquiry of this kind is a feature of human-reality in general or, alternatively, something that an ontology can establish.  But the inquiry itself and its results stand, by definition, completely outside the possibilities of an ontology.  On the other hand, a straightforward empirical description will only be able to give us lists of names and bring us into the presence of pseudo-irreducibles (the desire to write, to swim, a taste for risk, jealousy, etc.).  In point of fact we ought not only to draw up a list of actions, drives, and inclinations; we must go further and decipher them, which is to say we need to know how to interrogate them.  This inquiry can only be undertaken in accordance with the rules of a specific method.  We will call this method “existential psychoanalysis.” The principle of this psychoanalysis is that man is a totality and not a collection.  In consequence, he is expressed in his entirety by his most insignificant and most superficial demeanors; in other words, there is no taste, tic, or human act that does not reveal something.  The goal of psychoanalysis is to decipher man’s empirical behavior, i.e., to place in full daylight the revelations each behavior contains, and to determine them conceptually.  Its point of departure is experience ; its reference point is the preontological and fundamental understanding of the human person possessed by man.  Even though most people may in fact neglect the clues that are contained in a movement, a word, or a facial expression, and be mistaken about the revelation they provide, each person is no less possessed of the a priori sense of the revelatory value of these manifestations, and no less capable of deciphering them, at least if someone helps him and takes his hand.  Here, as elsewhere, we do not hit upon the truth by accident: it does not belong in a domain where we are required to seek it out without ever having any antecedent sense of it, in the way in which we can go looking for the sources of the Nile or the Niger.  It belongs a priori to human understanding, and the essential work is a hermeneutic, i.e., the work of deciphering, establishing, and conceptualizing it.  Its method is comparative: since in fact each instance of human behavior symbolizes in its way the fundamental choice that needs to be uncovered and since, at the same time, this choice is concealed in each instance by accidental characteristics and its historical juncture, it is by comparing these ways of behaving that we will be able to make the unique revelation, differently expressed in each one of them, come forth.  We are provided with a first sketch of this method by Freud and his disciples.  It is appropriate, therefore, to point out here more precisely the ways in which existential psychoanalysis takes its inspiration from psychoanalysis in the strict sense, and the ways in which it differs from it radically.  Both of them consider all the discernible objective manifestations of “psychological life” to maintain the relation of symbolization to symbol with the fundamental and global structures which strictly constitute the person .  Both of them hold that there are no primary data—inherited inclinations, character, etc.  Existential psychoanalysis knows of nothing before the original arising of human freedom; empirical psychoanalysis presents the individual’s initial affectivity as a virgin wax before its history.  The libido is nothing outside its concrete fixations, apart from a permanent possibility of becoming fixed in any way on any object.  Both consider the human being as a constant historialization and seek to discern the meaning, orientation, and incarnations of this history, rather than static and permanent givens.  Both of them, on account of this, consider man within the world and do not conceive that we might interrogate a man about what he is without taking account above everything of his situation.  Psychoanalytical modes of inquiry aim to reconstitute the subject’s life from his birth to the moment of his treatment; they make use of all the objective documents that they are able to find: letters, testimonies, diaries, “social” information of all kinds.  And what they are aiming to recover is not so much a pure psychological event as a dyad: the crucial event of childhood and the psychological crystallization around this event.  What we have here is again a situation .  Each “historical” fact, from this point of view, will be regarded at the same time as a factor in psychological evolution and as a symbol of this evolution.  Because in itself it is nothing, it can act only in accordance with the way in which it is taken up, and this very manner of taking it up symbolically translates the individual’s inner disposition.  Empirical and existential psychoanalysis both look for a fundamental attitude in situation, which cannot be expressed through simple and logical definitions, because it is prior to any logic, and which demands to be reconstructed in terms of the laws of specific syntheses.  Empirical psychoanalysis seeks to determine the complex , whose very name points to the multifaceted character of all the meanings that relate to it.  Existential psychoanalysis seeks to determine the original choice .  This original choice, which is made in the face of the world and is the choice of a position within the world, is totalizing.  Like the complex, the original choice is prior to logic; it chooses the person’s attitude in relation to logic and principles.  In interrogating it, therefore, there can be no question of conforming to logic.  The original choice gathers together the totality of the existent, within a pre-logical synthesis and, as such, it is the center of reference for an infinite number of multifaceted meanings.  In neither of our two types of psychoanalysis is the subject regarded as being in a privileged position from which to proceed to these inquiries into himself.  Each of them aims to be a strictly objective method, which treats the findings of reflection, just as much as the testimony of others, as documents.  Of course, the subject can carry out a psychoanalytical inquiry into himself.  But he will have to give up all at once the advantage of his particular position and interrogate himself exactly as if he were someone else.  Empirical psychoanalysis sets out, in fact, by postulating the existence of an unconscious psyche which evades the subject’s intuition as a matter of principle.  Existential psychoanalysis rejects the premise of the unconscious: for it, psychological facts are coextensive with consciousness.  But if the fundamental project is fully lived by the subject and, as such, fully conscious, that does not at all mean that it must by the same token be known by him but quite the contrary; the reader will recall perhaps how careful we were in our Introduction to distinguish between consciousness and knowledge.  Admittedly, as we also saw, reflection may be regarded as a quasi-knowledge.  But what it grasps at each instant is not the for-itself’s pure project as it is symbolically expressed—and often in many ways at once—through the concrete behavior that it apprehends: it is the concrete behavior itself, which is to say the particular desire at its date, densely tangled in its characteristics.  It grasps symbol and symbolization at the same time; it is, certainly, entirely constituted by a preontological understanding of the fundamental project; better still, insofar as reflection is also a non-thetic consciousness of the self in the form of reflection, it is this very project, as well as the nonreflective consciousness.  But it does not follow from this that it has the instruments and techniques necessary to isolate the symbolized choice, to determine it in concepts and to place it on its own in the full light of day.  It is penetrated by a great light without being able to express what the light illuminates.  It is not at all a matter of an unsolved puzzle, as the Freudians believe: everything is there, illuminated; reflection takes possession of all of it, grasps all of it.  But, rather, this “mystery in full light” comes about because this possession lacks the means which ordinarily allow for analysis and conceptualization .  13 It grasps everything, all at once, without shadows, without salience, without proportion—not because these shadows, these values, these points of salience, exist somewhere and are hidden from it but rather because it is the role of a different human attitude to establish them, and they can only exist through and for knowledge.  Reflection, which is unable to serve as the basis for existential psychoanalysis, merely provides it with the raw materials in relation to which the psychoanalyst is obliged to take up an objective attitude.  Only in this way will he be able to know what he already understands .  The outcome is that the complexes that are uprooted from the unconscious depths, like the projects that are uncovered by existential psychoanalysis, are apprehended from the Other’s point of view .  Accordingly the object that is hereby brought to light will be articulated in terms of the structures of a transcended-transcendence, i.e., its being will be being-for-the-Other even if, moreover, the psychoanalyst and the subject of the psychoanalysis are identical.  Thus the project that both types of psychoanalysis bring to light can only be the person’s totality, the irreducible fact of transcendence, as they are in their being-for-the-other .  What escapes forever from these investigative methods is the project as it is for itself, the complex in its own being.  This project-for-itself can only be enjoyed ; 14 there is an incompatibility between existence for itself and objective existence.  But the object of the psychoanalyses does not have any less of the reality of a being ; furthermore, the subject’s knowledge of it can help to illuminate reflection, and the latter can thereby become something to be enjoyed as a quasi-knowledge.  There the resemblances between the two types of psychoanalysis come to an end.  They differ to the extent that empirical psychoanalysis has decided what is irreducible, rather than allowing it to make itself known in an evident intuition.  Indeed the libido, or the will to power, 15 constitutes a psychobiological residue that is not clear in itself and which does not strike us as needing to be the irreducible term of research.  In the end it is experience which establishes that the foundation of the complexes is this libido or this will to power, and the results of empirical inquiry are utterly contingent and unconvincing; nothing prevents us from being able to conceive a priori of a “human-reality” which does not express itself through the will to power, whose libido does not constitute the original and undifferentiated project.  The choice, on the contrary, to which existential psychoanalysis leads us back, accounts for its original contingency, precisely because it is a choice, because the contingency of the choice is the reverse side of its freedom.  In addition, insofar as it is founded on the lack of being , conceived of as a fundamental character of being, it is legitimized as a choice , and we know that we do not have to push back any further.  Each result will be therefore fully contingent and at the same time legitimately irreducible.  Moreover, it will always remain particular , which is to say that we will not reach, as the ultimate goal of our research and the foundation of all behavior, an abstract and general term—the libido, for example—which becomes differentiated and concretized into complexes and then into individual instances of behavior by the action of external facts and the subject’s history but, on the contrary, a choice that remains unique and which is, from its origin, absolutely concrete; individual ways of behaving may express or particularize this choice, but they cannot make it any more concrete than it is already.  For this choice is nothing other than the being of each human-reality, and whether one says that some partial behavior is , or that it expresses, the original choice of this human-reality comes to the same thing, since there is no difference for human-reality between existing and choosing itself.  We can understand, in consequence, that existential psychoanalysis does not need to go beyond the fundamental “complex,” which is precisely a choice of being, in order to reach some abstraction like the libido, which supposedly explains it.  The complex is the ultimate choice; it is a choice of being and it makes itself such .  Each time it is brought to light it reveals itself to be an irreducible event.  From this it necessarily follows that the libido and the will to power do not belong to existential psychoanalysis—either as general characteristics which all men have in common, or as irreducible terms.  At the most we might observe, after investigation, that for some subjects these express, in the form of particular configurations, a fundamental choice that we cannot reduce to either of them.  We have seen, in fact, that desire and sexuality in general express the for-itself’s original attempt to retrieve its being that has been alienated by the Other.  The will to power also presupposes, at its origin, being-for-the-Other, an understanding of the other and the choice to gain one’s salvation through the other.  The foundation of this attitude must be in an initial choice that enables us to understand how being-in-itself-for-itself may become radically assimilated with being-for-the-Other.  The fact that the final term in this existential inquiry must be a choice distinguishes more clearly still the psychoanalysis whose method and principal features we are outlining: through that claim, it abandons the assumption that the environment acts mechanically on the subject under consideration.  The environment can only act on the subject to the precise extent to which he understands it, which is to say transforms it into his situation.  No objective description of this environment could therefore be of use to us.  From the outset, the environment conceived as a situation refers us back to the for-itself which chooses, exactly as the for-itself refers to his environment through his being in the world.  In abandoning any type of mechanical causation, we also abandon any general interpretations of the symbolism we have in view.  As our aim cannot be that of establishing empirical laws of succession, we will not be able to construct a universal symbolism.  Instead, the psychoanalyst will have to reinvent a symbolism each time, according to the particular case he is considering.  If being is a totality, it is not in fact conceivable that basic links of symbolization might exist (feces = gold, pincushion = breast, etc.), retaining a constant meaning in each case, which is to say remaining unaltered when one moves on from one signifying structure to another structure.  In addition, the psychoanalyst will never lose sight of the fact that the choice is a living one and that, in consequence, it may always be revoked by the subject he is studying.  We demonstrated, in the previous chapter, the importance of the instant , which represents the sudden changes in orientation and the taking up of a new position in relation to an unchanging past.  Henceforth we must always be ready to consider that symbols can change in meaning, and to abandon the system of symbols used so far.  Thus existential psychoanalysis has a duty to be entirely flexible and to be guided by the slightest observable changes in the subject: the task here is to understand the individual , and often even an instant.  Because of this, the method that was used for one subject may not be employed for another subject, or for the same subject in a later period.  And precisely because the aim of the inquiry must be to discover a choice , and not a state , this inquiry will be obliged to remember on each occasion that its object is not some given, buried in the shadows of the unconscious, but a free and conscious determination—which is not even an inhabitant of consciousness but is as one with that consciousness itself.  Empirical psychoanalysis, to the extent to which its method is more valuable than its principles, often heads in the direction of an existential discovery, even though it always stops on the way.  When it gets nearer in this way to the fundamental choice, the subject’s resistances suddenly collapse, and all at once he recognizes the image of himself with which he is presented, as if he were seeing himself in a mirror.  This involuntary testimony on the part of the subject is precious to the psychoanalyst; in it he sees a sign that he has reached his goal; he is able to move on from his investigations, in the strict sense, to the treatment.  But nothing in his principles or his initial premises allows him to understand or to make use of this testimony.  What would entitle him to do this? If the complex really is unconscious, which is to say if the sign is separated from its meaning by a barrier, how could the subject recognize it? Is it the unconscious complex which recognizes itself? But doesn’t it lack understanding ? And if we had to concede to it a faculty of understanding signs, would we not have to turn it at the same time into an unconscious which is conscious? What indeed is it to understand if it is not to be conscious that one has understood? Should we say, on the contrary, that it is the subject insofar as he is conscious who recognizes the image put forward? But how would he be able to compare it to what truly affects him, since that is out of reach and he has never had knowledge of it? At most he will be able to judge that the psychoanalytic explanation of his case is a probable hypothesis, which derives its probability from the amount of behavior it explains.  He will therefore find himself, in relation to this interpretation, in the position of a third party, of the psychoanalyst himself: he has no privileged position.  And if he believes in the probability of the psychoanalytical hypotheses, will this mere belief, which remains within the limits of his consciousness, also be able to burst through the barriers that form a dike against his unconscious drives? Doubtless the psychoanalyst has a vague image of a sudden coincidence of the conscious with the unconscious.  But he has deprived himself of the means to conceive of this coincidence in positive terms.  However, the subject’s illumination is a fact.  There is indeed an intuition there, accompanied by evidence.  The subject, guided by the psychoanalyst, does something more, and better, than assenting to a hypothesis: he touches and he sees what he is.  That can only really be understood if the subject has never stopped being conscious of his deep drives or, better, if these drives are not to be distinguished from his consciousness itself.  In this case, as we saw earlier, psychoanalytic interpretation does not bring him to gain consciousness of what he is: it makes him gain knowledge of it.  It is therefore the task of existential psychoanalysis to claim that the subject’s final intuition is final.  This comparison provides us with a better understanding of what existential psychoanalysis must be if it is to be able to exist.  It is a method that aims to bring to light, in a strictly objective form, the subjective choice through which each person makes himself a person, i.e., acquaints himself with what he is.  As what it looks for is a choice of being at the same time as a being , it must reduce individual modes of behavior to the fundamental relations of being —not of sexuality or will to power—that are expressed in this behavior.  It is therefore guided from the beginning toward an understanding of being and must not take on any goal other than that of finding being, and the being’s way of being as it confronts that being.  Before it has reached that goal, it is not allowed to stop.  It will make use of the understanding of being that is a characteristic of the inquirer insofar as he is himself human-reality; and, as it seeks to disengage being from its symbolic expressions, it will have to reinvent each time, on the basis of a comparative study of types of behavior, a system of symbols with the intention of deciphering them.  Its criterion of success will be the number of facts that its hypothesis allows it to explain and to unify, along with an evident intuition of the irreducibility of the final term at which it arrives.  In addition to this criterion there will be, in all cases where this is possible, the subject’s decisive testimony.  The results that are thereby achieved—i.e., the individual’s ultimate ends—may at that point become the object of a classification, and it is on a comparison of these results that we will be able to base some general considerations about human-reality as an empirical choice of its own ends.  The actions studied by this psychoanalysis will not only be dreams, parapraxes, 16 obsessions, and neuroses but also, and especially, the person’s thoughts from the night before, his well-adapted and successful actions, his style, etc.  This psychoanalysis has not yet found its Freud: at the most we may be able to get a sense of it from some especially accomplished biographies.  We hope moreover to be able to attempt to provide two examples of it, in relation to Flaubert and Dostoyevsky.  But it does not greatly matter to us here whether this method exists: the important thing for us is that it should be possible.  II.  TO DO AND TO HAVE: POSSESSION The findings about behavior and desire that can be obtained through ontology should serve as the principles of existential psychoanalysis.  That does not mean that there are abstract desires that exist, common to all men, prior to any specification but that there are structures to concrete desires which fall under the study of ontology because every desire expresses all of human-reality, and this applies no less to the desire to eat or to sleep than to the desire to create a work of art.  As we have shown elsewhere, 17 indeed, our knowledge of man must be totalizing; in this area, empirical and partial items of knowledge are devoid of meaning.  We will therefore have finished our task if we use the knowledge that we have acquired so far to lay down the bases for existential psychoanalysis.  It is there, in fact, that ontology should come to a stop: its final discoveries are the first principles of psychoanalysis.  From that point on, another method will be necessary, since the object is different.  What therefore does ontology teach us about desire, insofar as desire is the being of human-reality? Desire is a lack in being, as we have seen.  As such, it is immediately directed on the being that it lacks.  This being, as we have seen, is in-itself-for-itself, a consciousness that has become substance, a substance that has become its own cause, a Man-God.  In this way the being of human-reality is not originally a substance but a lived relation: the terms of this relation are the original in-itself, frozen in its contingency and facticity, and whose essential characteristic is that it is , that it exists , and, on the other hand, the in-itself-for-itself or value, which corresponds to the contingent in-itself’s ideal, and is characterized as being beyond all contingency and all existence.  Man is neither one nor the other of these beings, because he is not: he is what he is not, and he is not what he is; he is the nihilation of the contingent in-itself insofar as the “itself” involved in this nihilation is its forward flight toward the in-itself that is its own cause.  Human-reality is purely the endeavor to become God, an endeavor that is without any given substratum, and in which there is nothing to make this effort.  Desire expresses this endeavor.  Nonetheless, desire is not defined only in relation to the in-itself-that-is-its-own-cause.  It is also relative to a brute and concrete existent, commonly known as the desire’s object.  This object will sometimes be a piece of bread, sometimes a car, sometimes a woman, sometimes an object that has not yet been produced and which is nonetheless determinate, as when an artist desires to create a work of art.  In this way desire expresses in its very structure man’s relation with one or several objects in the world; it is one of the aspects of being-in-the-world.  From this point of view, it seems at first that this relation does not belong to just one type.  We talk of the “desire for something” only as an abbreviation.  In fact a thousand empirical examples show that we desire to possess this object or to make  faire  that thing or to be someone.  If I desire this painting, it means that I desire to buy it, in order to appropriate it.  If I desire to write a book, or to go for a walk, it means I desire to do that book, or to do that walk.  18 If I adorn myself, it is because I desire to be beautiful; I educate myself in order to be learned, etc.  Thus, right from the outset, the three great categories of concrete human existence make their appearance in their original relationship: to do , to have, and to be .  It is easy to see, however, that the desire to do or to make something is not irreducible.  One makes an object in order to maintain a certain relationship with it.  This new relationship may be immediately reducible to “ having ” it.  For example, I chisel a walking stick out of the branch of a tree (I “make” a stick with a branch) in order to have this stick.  The “making”  faire  can be reduced to a means of having.  That is most often the case.  But it may also happen that my activity does not immediately appear to be reducible.  It may seem to be gratuitous, as in the case of scientific research, sport, and aesthetic creation.  Yet the doing , in these various cases, is not irreducible either.  If I create a painting, a play, a melody, it is in order to be at the origin of some particular existence.  And this existence is of interest to me only to the extent to which the creative relation that I establish between it and myself gives me a particular property right over it.  It is not only that this painting, for which I have had the idea, should exist: it must, further, exist through me .  The ideal would obviously be, in one sense, that I would sustain it in being through a kind of continuous creation and that, by so doing, it would be mine in the form of a constantly renewed emanation.  But, in another sense, it is necessary for it to be radically distinct from myself, in order for it to be mine and not me ; the danger here would be, as in Descartes’s theory of substances, that through a lack of independence and objectivity its being would become reabsorbed into my being; and so it is also necessary that it should exist in itself , i.e., that it should constantly renew its existence by itself .  Thereafter my work will appear as a creation that is continuous but frozen into the in-itself; it forever bears my “mark,” which means it is forever “my” idea.  Every work of art is a thought, an “idea”; to the extent that it is nothing but a meaning, its traits are clearly spiritual.  But, on the other hand, this meaning, this thought which is, in one sense, constantly in actuality, as if I were perpetually forming it, as if some mind were tirelessly conceiving it—a mind that is my mind—this thought maintains itself on its own in being, and does not in any way cease to be active when I am not currently thinking it.  I am therefore in the twofold relationship with it of a consciousness that conceives it and a consciousness that encounters it.  It is precisely this twofold relationship that I express when I say that it is mine .  We will be able to see its meaning when we have clarified the meaning of the category “to have.” And it is in order to maintain this twofold relationship within the synthesis of appropriation that I create my work.  This synthesis of the me and the not-me (intimacy, the translucency of thought; opacity, the indifference of the in-itself) is what I am aiming it, and is precisely what will make this work into my property.  In this sense, I am able to appropriate to myself not only those works that are artistic in the strict sense, but this stick, which I have chiseled from a branch, will also belong to me twice over: in the first place, as an everyday object that is available for my use and which I own, just as I own my clothes or my books, and, in the second place, as my work.  Those people, therefore, who prefer to surround themselves with everyday objects that they have made themselves are refining the art of appropriation.  They are combining with a single object, and in a single syncretic act, an appropriation by means of use and an appropriation by means of creation.  We find the unity of a single project, from the case of artistic creation to that of the cigarette which “is better when you have rolled it yourself.” In a short while we will return to this project, in relation to a special type of property, akin to a degraded version of it, which goes by the name of luxury , because—as we will see—“luxury” does not refer to a quality of the possessed object but to a quality of the possession.  Knowing —as we showed in the prelude to this fourth part—is still another form of appropriation.  And that is why scientific investigation is no more than an attempt at appropriation.  The truth that is discovered, like the work of art, is my knowledge; it is the noema of a thought that is only revealed when I form the thought, and which consequently appears to be in some way maintained by me in its existence.  It is through me that an aspect of the world is revealed, and it is revealed to me.  In this sense I am the creator and the possessor.  And this is not because I regard the aspect of being that I uncover as a mere representation but, quite to the contrary, because this aspect that is uncovered only through me really and profoundly is .  I am able to say that I manifest it, in the sense in which Gide tells us that “we must always make manifest.” 19 But I encounter an independence analogous to that of the work of art in my thought’s truth , i.e., in its objectivity.  This thought that I am forming, and whose existence derives from me, is at the same time pursuing its existence by itself, to the extent to which it is at the same time everyone’s thought .  It is me twice over, since it is the world revealing itself to me, and me in the company of others, as I form my thought with another’s mind—and it is closed off from me twice over, since it is the being that I am not (insofar as it is revealed to me) and since it is everyone’s thought, from the moment it appears, a thought that is destined to anonymity.  Here again we can express this synthesis of the me and the not-me with the term “mine.” But in addition, within the very idea of discovery, of revelation, an idea of the appropriation involved in using something is included.  Sight is an enjoyment 20 of something; to see something is to deflower it.  If we examine the comparisons that are usually made in order to express the relation between the knower and the known, we will see that many of them are presented in terms of a certain rape by being seen .  The unknown object is presented as being immaculate, virgin, and is comparable to a whiteness .  It has not yet “given up” its secret; man has not yet “ wrested ” it from it.  All the images emphasize the object’s ignorance of the investigations and instruments targeted at it: unaware that it is known, it goes about its business without noticing the spying eyes, like a woman surprised by a passerby as she is washing.  Various darker and more precise images, such as nature’s “inviolate depths,” evoke the act of coitus more clearly.  We tear nature’s veils away, and we unveil it (cf.  Schiller’s “Veiled Statue at Sais”); 21 all investigation always includes the idea of a nudity that is exposed to the elements by moving the obstacles that cover it, as Actaeon moves aside the branches in order better to see Diana at her toilet.  And, besides, knowledge is a hunt.  Bacon calls it “Pan’s hunt.” 22 The scholar is a hunter who surprises a naked white figure, and violates her through his gaze.  The set of these images, therefore, shows us something that we may call the Actaeon complex .  In following up this idea of hunting, moreover, we will come across another symbol of appropriation, which is perhaps still more primitive: for we hunt in order to eat.  Curiosity in an animal is always sexual or to do with food.  To know something is to eat it with one’s eyes.  23 In fact we can observe here, in relation to the knowledge that we gain through the senses, a process that reverses the one revealed by the case of the artwork.  In this latter case, we noted the relation of frozen emanation in which it stands to the mind.  The mind continually produces it, and yet it stands alone, as if in a state of indifference in relation to this production.  This relation exists, in this form, in an act of knowledge.  But it does not exclude its opposite: in knowing, consciousness pulls its object toward it and incorporates it; knowledge is assimilation; the works of French epistemology are teeming with metaphors about food (absorption, digestion, assimilation).  Thus there is a movement of dissolution between the object and the knowing subject.  The known is transformed into me ; it becomes my thought and thereby consents to receive its existence from me alone.  But this movement of dissolution becomes frozen, owing to the fact that the known remains in the same place, endlessly absorbed and eaten, and endlessly intact, entirely digested, and yet entirely outside and undigested, like a pebble.  We can note the importance, in naïve imaginations, of the symbol of the “undigested digested”: the stone in the ostrich’s stomach; Jonah in the whale’s stomach.  It stands for a dream of non-destructive assimilation.  Unhappily however, as Hegel noted, desire destroys its object.  24 (In this sense, he said, desire is the desire to eat.) In reaction against this dialectic necessity, the for-itself dreams of an object that I might assimilate entirely, that would be me —without dissolving in me—while retaining its in-itself structure, because what I desire is exactly this object and, if I eat it, I no longer have it, and I no longer encounter anything but myself.  This impossible synthesis of assimilation and the preserved integrity of what is assimilated converges, in its deepest roots, with sexuality’s fundamental drives.  Indeed, carnal “possession” provides us with the irritating and seductive image of a body that is constantly possessed and constantly new, on which our possession leaves no trace.  This is the deep symbolic meaning of the quality of “smooth,” or “polished.” Something smooth can be picked up and felt; it remains no less impenetrable, and escapes no less, like water, from our appropriative caress.  That is why there is so much emphasis, in erotic descriptions, on the smooth whiteness of the woman’s body.  It is smooth: it re-forms itself beneath the caress, as water re-forms itself after the stone, in passing through it, pierced it with a hole.  And at the same time, as we have seen, the lover’s dream is really to be identified with his beloved object while at the same time preserving her individuality: the other should be me, without ceasing to be other.  That is exactly what we encounter in scientific inquiry: the known object, like the stone in the ostrich’s stomach, is entirely inside me, assimilated, transformed into myself, and it is entirely me; but at the same time it is impenetrable, unable to be transformed, entirely smooth, in a state of indifferent nudity like a body that is loved and caressed in vain.  It remains outside; to know is to eat on the outside, without consuming.  We see the sexual and the alimentary currents merge and interpenetrate, in order to constitute the Actaeon complex and the Jonah complex; we see the digestive and sensual roots joining together to give birth to the desire to know.  Knowledge is at the same time penetration and a caress on the surface , digestion and a contemplation from a distance of an object that cannot be deformed, the production of a thought by means of a continuous creation and the observation of that thought’s total objective independence.  The known object is my thought as a thing .  And that is precisely what I profoundly desire when I set out on my research: to grasp my thought as a thing, and the thing as my thought.  The syncretic relation that blends together such diverse drives can only be a relation of appropriation .  That is why the desire to know, however disinterested it may appear, is a relation of appropriation.  One of the forms that having may take is knowing .  There remains a type of activity that we are inclined to present as entirely gratuitous: the activity of play and the “drives” related to it.  Can we discern any appropriative drive in sport? Certainly, we must note from the outset that play, in opposing itself to the spirit of seriousness, seems to be the least possessive attitude; it strips the real of its reality.  Seriousness is present when we start out from the world and attribute more reality to the world than to ourselves, at the very least when someone endows himself with reality to the extent that he belongs to the world.  It is not an accident that materialism is serious, nor is it an accident either that we find it everywhere and always as the revolutionary’s doctrine of choice.  Revolutionaries are serious.  They know themselves from the outset on the basis of the world that crushes them, and they want to change this world that is crushing them.  In that respect they find themselves in agreement with their old enemies, the property owners, who also know themselves and assess themselves on the basis of their position in the world.  Thus all serious thinking is thickened by the world, and coagulates; it is an abdication on the part of human-reality in favor of the world.  The serious man is “of the world” and no longer seeks help from himself; he no longer even imagines the possibility of leaving the world, because he has given himself the type of existence of a rock, the consistency, the inertia, the opacity of being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  It goes without saying that the serious man buries in his depths any consciousness of his freedom, he is in bad faith and his bad faith aims to present him to his own eyes as a consequence: everything is a consequence for him, and there is never any principle; that is why he is so attentive to the consequences of his acts.  Marx put forward the first dogma of seriousness when he affirmed the object’s priority over the subject, and man is serious when he takes himself for an object.  Indeed, like Kierkegaard’s irony, play liberates subjectivity.  What is play, in fact, if not an activity of which man is the first origin, whose principles are posited by man, and whose consequences can only be in accordance with the principles he has posited? The moment a man apprehends himself as free and wishes to make use of his freedom, and no matter how much anguish he feels, his activity is one of play: he is, in effect, its first principle, and escapes from “natured nature”; 25 he posits the value and rules of his acts himself and agrees to play only according to the rules that he himself has posited and determined.  This explains why, in one sense, the world is “less real.” It seems therefore that the man who plays, who applies himself to discovering himself as free in his action itself, could not in any way be concerned to possess a worldly being.  His goal, whether he aims at it through sport, mime, or games that he plays 26 in the strict sense of the term, is to make contact with himself as a certain kind of being, precisely the being that is in question in its being.  Nonetheless, the effect of these observations is not to show us that the desire to do is, in the case of play, irreducible.  They teach us, on the contrary, that the desire to do may here be reduced to a certain desire to be.  The action is not in itself its own goal; nor does its explicit purpose represent its goal and its innermost meaning; rather the function of the action is to manifest and presentify to itself the absolute freedom that is the person’s very being.  This particular type of project, which has freedom for its foundation and its aim, deserves special study.  Indeed, it differs radically from all the others in aiming at a radically different type of being.  We ought to explain in detail its relations with the project to-be-God that we have taken to be the deep structure of human-reality.  But we cannot pursue this study here: in fact it belongs to an ethics and it requires us first to have determined the nature and role of purifying reflection (the object of our descriptions so far has only been “complicit” reflection); in addition, the position that it requires us to take up, in relation to the values that haunt the for-itself, can only be moral .  It remains no less true that the desire to play is fundamentally a desire to be.  In this way the three categories “to be,” “to do,” and “to have” can be reduced, here as everywhere else, to two: the “to do” is purely transitive.  A desire can only be, at bottom, a desire to be or a desire to have .  On the other hand it is rare to find play in the absence of any appropriative drive.  I leave to one side the desire to perform, to beat a record, which may act as a stimulus on the sportsman; I am not even talking about the desire “to have” a beautiful body or harmonious muscles, which is connected with the desire to appropriate objectively one’s own being-for-the-other.  These desires do not always intervene and, moreover, they are not fundamental.  Rather, there is an appropriative component in the sporting action itself.  Sport is in fact the free transformation of an environment within the world into an element of support for an action.  This makes it, like art, something creative.  Take a field of snow, a mountain pasture.  To see it is already to possess it.  In itself, it is already grasped in vision as a symbol of being.  27 It represents pure externality, radical spatiality; its lack of differentiation, its monotony, and its whiteness manifest the absolute nudity of substance; it is the in-itself that is nothing but in-itself, the being of the phenomenon which suddenly manifests itself outside any phenomenon.  At the same time, its solid immobility expresses the in-itself’s objective permanence and resistance, its opacity and its impenetrability.  Yet this initial enjoyment of it in intuition will not suffice for me.  This pure in-itself, which resembles the absolute and intelligible plenum of Descartes’s extension, fascinates me as the pure appearing of the not-self; what I want, then, is precisely that this in-itself should relate to me by means of the relation of emanation—while at the same time remaining in itself.  That is already the meaning of the snowmen and snowballs made by youngsters: the goal is to “do something with this snow,” i.e., to impose a form on it which adheres to the matter so thoroughly that the latter seems to exist for the sake of the former.  But if I come closer, if I want to establish appropriative contact with the field of snow, everything changes: its scale of being is modified, so it exists inch by inch rather than existing across large spaces; and spots, twigs, and cracks have the effect of individualizing each square centimeter.  At the same time, its solidity melts into water.  I sink into the snow right up to my knees, and if I pick up some snow in my hands, it turns into liquid between my fingers and flows away, leaving nothing behind; the in-itself is transformed into nothingness.  At the same time, my dream of appropriating the snow vanishes.  Besides, I do not know what to do with this snow that I have approached in order to look more closely at it: I cannot take hold of the field, or even reconstitute it as the substantial totality that offered itself up to my gaze, and which has suddenly and doubly collapsed.  The meaning of skiing is not only that it enables me to move about quickly and to acquire a technical skill, and neither is it play (as I increase my speed, or the difficulty of my route, according to whim); it is also that it enables me to possess this field of snow.  Now I am doing something with it .  In other words, through my very activity as someone skiing, I modify its matter and its meaning.  By virtue of appearing to me now, in my trajectory itself, as a slope to go down, it recovers a continuity and a unity that it had lost.  Now the snow is connective tissue.  It is contained between two terms, joining the point of departure with the point of arrival and as, in my descent, I do not consider it in itself, an inch at a time, but focus always on a point to be reached beyond the position I am presently occupying, it does not collapse into an infinity of individual details but is traveled across toward the point I assign to myself.  This journey is not only an activity of displacement but also, and especially, a synthetic activity of organization and combination: I extend the ski field before me in the same way as the geometer who, according to Kant, can apprehend a straight line only by drawing it.  In other respects this organization is marginal, and not focal: the field of snow is not unified for its own sake and in itself; the goal I have posited and clearly grasped, the object of my attention, is the endpoint at which I will arrive.  The snowy space becomes a mass from below, implicitly; its cohesion is that of the white space contained within a circumference, for example, when I look at the circle’s black line without explicitly paying heed to its surface.  And, precisely because I maintain it marginally, implicitly, and unspoken, it adapts to me; I have it firmly in hand, and I surpass it toward its end as the upholsterer surpasses the hammer he is using toward its end, which is to nail a hanging to the wall.  There can be no more complete appropriation than this instrumental appropriation; here the synthetic activity of appropriation is a technical activity of utilization.  The snow arises as my act’s matter, in the way in which the hammer arises as the pure fulfillment of the act of hammering.  At the same time, I have chosen a certain point of view in order to apprehend this snowy slope: this point of view is a determinate speed , emanating from me, that I am able to increase or decrease at will, and which constitutes the field I am crossing into a determinate object, entirely distinct from what it would be at another speed.  The speed organizes the structures according to its will; an object does or does not form part of a particular group, according to whether I have or have not adopted such and such a speed (we may think, for example, of Provence as it is seen “on foot,” “by car,” “by rail,” “by bicycle”: it presents as many different countenances, according to whether Béziers is an hour, a morning, or two days away from Narbonne, which is to say whether Narbonne is isolated and posited for itself with its surroundings, or whether it constitutes a coherent group, along with Béziers and Sète, for example.  In this latter case, Narbonne’s relation to the sea is directly accessible to intuition; in the other, it is denied , and can be an object only for a pure concept).  I am therefore the one who informs the field of snow through the free speed that I allot to myself.  But, at the same time, I am acting on my matter .  The speed does not only impose a form upon a matter that is already in some way given; it creates a matter too.  The snow, which subsided beneath my weight when I walked, which melted into water when I tried to take hold of it, suddenly solidifies as it is acted on by my speed; it carries me.  It is not that I have lost sight of its lightness, its insubstantiality, its perpetual evanescence.  Quite the contrary: it is precisely this lightness, this evanescence, this secret liquidity, which carry me, which means they condense and merge into each other in order to carry me.  The fact is that I have a special relation of appropriation with the snow: that of gliding .  We will study this relation in detail later.  For now, we may grasp its meaning.  By gliding I remain, as we say, superficial.  That is not correct: of course, I am only skimming the surface, and this skimming deserves by itself a full investigation.  But I do not for all that actualize any less of a synthesis of depth; I feel the layer of snow becoming organized even in its deepest parts in order to support me; my gliding is an action at a distance , which ensures that I master the matter without needing to dig myself into, or to get stuck within, this matter in order to control it.  Gliding is the opposite of taking root.  A root is already half-assimilated to the earth that feeds it, as a living concretion of the earth; it can make use of the earth only by becoming earth itself, i.e., by submitting itself, in a sense, to the matter of which it wants to make use.  Gliding, on the contrary, actualizes a material unity in the dimension of depth without penetrating any further than the surface: it is like a feared master who has no need to insist or raise his voice to be obeyed.  What an admirable image of power! This explains the well-known advice “Thus lightly touch and quickly go,” 28 which does not mean “Remain superficial; do not go deeper” but, on the contrary, “Actualize some syntheses of depth, but without compromising yourself.” And gliding is an appropriation precisely because the synthesis of a supporting structure that is actualized through speed applies only to the person gliding, and only for the time in which he is gliding.  The snow’s solidity applies only to me, and only I am aware of it; it is a secret that it delivers to me alone, and that is already no longer true behind me .  This gliding, therefore, actualizes a strictly individual relation with matter, a historical relation; it gathers itself together and solidifies in order to carry me and it falls back, swooning, in its fragmentation, behind me.  In this way, by means of my movement, I have achieved for myself something unique.  The ideal of gliding is therefore to glide without a trace: it is gliding across water (by rowboat, motorboat, and above all by water-skiing, which, although it came late, represents something like the limit toward which, from this point of view, all water sports were tending).  Gliding across snow is already less perfect; there is a trace behind me, and I have—however slightly—compromised myself.  Gliding across ice, which scratches the ice and encounters a matter that is already wholly organized, is very inferior in quality and, if despite everything it comes off, that is for other reasons.  This explains our mild disappointment when we see the imprints on the snow left behind by our skis: how much better it would be if it re-formed itself as we passed! Moreover, when we let ourselves glide down the slope, we entertain the illusion that we are making no mark on it; we ask the snow to behave like this water that it secretly is.  In this way, gliding seems to resemble a continuous creation: our speed, which is comparable to consciousness and, in this case, symbolizes consciousness, 29 engenders in the matter, as long as it lasts, a deep quality which remains only as long as the speed exists, a kind of gathering together that overcomes its indifferent externality and which is undone—like a bundle—behind the gliding movement.  A form-giving unification, and a synthetic condensation of the field of snow that gathers itself into an instrumental structure, which is used , in the way we use a hammer or an anvil, and adapts itself compliantly to the action, which is implicit within it and its fulfillment, a continuous and creative action on the snow’s very matter , a solidification of the snowy mass by means of the gliding across it, an assimilation of the snow to water that can bear weight, docile and without memory, to a woman’s naked body, left intact by the caress, and troubled to its core: such is the skier’s action on reality.  But at the same time the snow remains impenetrable and out of reach; in a sense, the skier’s action only develops its potential .  It makes it yield what it is able to render; it is only through the sporting action that the homogeneous and solid matter delivers up to it its solidity and homogeneity, but this solidity and this homogeneity remain properties that are hatched within the matter.  This synthesis of the me with the not-me, which is brought about in this case by the action of the sport, is expressed—as in the case of speculative knowledge and the work of art—by the affirmation of the skier’s right over the snow.  It is my field of snow: I have crossed it a hundred times and, through my speed, I have a hundred times engendered this condensing and supporting force; it is mine .  To this aspect of appropriation through sport, we must add this other one: the overcoming of difficulty.  It is more widely understood, and we will barely dwell on it.  Before I can descend this snowy slope, I was obliged to climb up it.  And this ascent presented me with another side of the snow: its resistance.  I felt this resistance with my fatigue, and I was able to gauge at each moment the progress of my victory.  Here the snow is assimilated to an other , and the everyday expressions “taming,” “overcoming,” “dominating,” etc., show clearly that it is a matter of establishing the relation, between me and the snow, of master and slave.  We can also find this aspect of appropriation in climbing , in swimming , in obstacle races, etc.  The peak on which we have planted a flag is a peak we have appropriated .  In this way, a crucial aspect of sporting activity—and especially open-air sports—is the conquest of these enormous masses of water, earth, and air which seem a priori to be impossible to tame and to utilize; and in each case it is not a matter of possessing the element for itself but, instead, the type of in-itself existence that is expressed through the medium of this element; it is the substance’s homogeneity that we want to possess, in the form of the snow; it is the in-itself’s impenetrability and its timeless permanence that we want to appropriate in the form of the earth or the rock, etc.  Art, science, and our playful activities are, either totally or in part, activities of appropriation, and what they wish to appropriate, beyond the concrete object of their quest, is being itself, the absolute being of the in itself.  Thus ontology teaches us that desire is originally the desire to be , and that it is characterized as a free lack of being.  But it also teaches us that desire is a relation with a concrete existent in the midst of the world, and that this existent is conceived in terms of the in-itself; it teaches us that the for-itself’s relation to this desired in-itself is appropriation.  We find ourselves, therefore, in the presence of a twofold determination of desire: on the one hand, desire is defined as the desire to be a certain being which is the in-itself-for-itself , and whose existence is ideal; on the other hand, desire is defined, in the vast majority of cases, 30 as a relation with a contingent and concrete in-itself, whose appropriation is projected.  Is this a case of overdetermination? Are these two characteristics compatible? Existential psychoanalysis can be secure in its principles only if ontology has antecedently determined the relation between these two beings: the concrete and contingent in-itself (or the desire’s object) and the in-itself-for-itself (or the desire’s ideal), and only if it has explicated the relation that connects appropriation, as a type of relation to the in-itself, to being itself, as a type of relation to the in-itself-for-itself.  This is what we will attempt to do now.  What is appropriation or, alternatively, what do we mean in general by possessing an object? We have seen the reducibility of the category of “ making ” or “ doing ” ( faire ), in which we can at some times discern being, and at other times having; does this also apply to the category of having ? I see that to possess an object is, in a great many cases, to be able to use it .  However, this definition does not satisfy me: in this café I am using this saucer and this glass; however, they are not mine; I cannot “use” this painting hanging from my wall, and yet it is mine .  And nor is it important that, in some cases, I have the right to destroy what I possess; a definition of property in terms of that right would be highly abstract and, moreover, in a society where the economy is “managed,” a boss may own his factory without having the right to close it; in the Roman Empire, the master owned his slave and did not have the right to put him to death.  Besides, what does the right to destroy, or the right to use, mean here? I can see that this right points to something social, and that property seems to be defined within the framework of life in a society.  But I can also see that a right is purely negative, and limited to preventing others from destroying or using what belongs to me.  Of course, one can try to define property as a social function.  But, first, if society does indeed confer the right to ownership, according to certain principles, it does not follow that it creates the relation of appropriation.  The most that can be said is that it legitimizes it.  Quite to the contrary, in order for property to be able to be raised to the level of the sacred , it is necessary for it to exist in the first place as a spontaneously established relation between the for-itself and the concrete in-itself.  And if we are able to imagine a more just collective organization in the future, where individual possession would cease—at least within certain limits—to be protected and sanctified, that still does not mean that the appropriative connection will cease to exist; it might be that it remains, in fact, at least as a private relation, between man and thing.  Similarly, in primitive societies where the conjugal relation has not yet been legitimized and where the transmission of status is still matronymic, this sexual relation still exists, at least as a kind of common-law marriage.  We must therefore distinguish between possession and the right to possess.  For the same reason, I must reject any definition of the Proudhonian type—“Property is theft”—for it is beside the point.  It may be, in fact, that private property is the product of theft, and that maintaining this property has the effect of despoiling an Other.  But whatever its origins and its effects, it remains no less possible to describe and define property in itself.  The thief regards himself as the owner of the money he has stolen.  What we are concerned with, therefore, is the description of the precise relation of the thief to the goods he has stolen, just as much as the relation of the lawful owner to the property he has “honestly acquired.” If I consider an object that I possess, I can see that the quality of “being possessed” does not refer to it as a purely external appellation, marking its relation of externality with me: quite to the contrary, this quality defines it deeply; it appears to me and it appears to others as forming part of its being.  This can be taken to such an extent that some men, in primitive societies, may be defined by saying that they are possessed ; these men are given, in themselves, as belonging to … This can also be seen in primitive funeral ceremonies where the dead are buried with the objects that belong to them.  The rational explanation—“so that they can use them”—has obviously come later.  Instead, it seems that, at the time when this sort of custom spontaneously appeared, it did not seem necessary to question it.  The objects had this unusual property of belonging to the dead.  31 They formed a totality with him; there could no more be a question of burying the deceased without his everyday objects than of burying him, for example, without one of his legs.  The corpse, the cup he drank from, the knife he used, add up to just one dead person .  The principle underlying the custom of burning widows in Malabar is easily understood: 32 the woman has been possessed ; the dead man therefore drags her into his death, and in legal terms she is dead; the only remaining task is to help her to pass from this legal death to her de facto death.  Those objects that cannot be buried are haunted.  A ghost is nothing but the concrete materialization of the “ possessed-being ,” of the house and furniture.  To say that a house is haunted is to say that neither money nor effort can wipe out the absolute and metaphysical fact of its possession by an earlier occupant.  It is true that the ghosts who haunt manors are degraded Lares deities.  But what are the Lares deities themselves if not layers of possession that have been deposited, one after the other, on the house’s walls and furniture? 33 Even the phrase that we use, in referring to the relation of an object and its owner, highlights the deep penetration of appropriation: to be possessed is to be somebody’s own … 34 In other words, the possessed object has been reached in its being .  Moreover, as we have seen, the destruction of the possessor implies the de jure destruction of his possessed object and, conversely, the survival of a possessed object implies the de jure survival of its possessor.  The bond of possession is an internal bond of being .  I encounter the possessor in and through the object he possesses.  That obviously explains the importance of relics , by which we do not mean only religious relics but also, and especially, the entire set of a famous man’s belongings (the Museum Victor Hugo, the “objects that belonged to” Balzac, or Flaubert, etc.) in which we try to rediscover them, or our “souvenirs” of a dead loved one which seem to “perpetuate” his memory.  This internal and ontological link between the possessed and the possessor (which customs such as branding with a hot iron have often attempted to materialize) cannot be explained by any “realist” theory of appropriation.  If it is true that realism can be defined as a doctrine that makes subject and object into two independent substances, each possessing an existence for itself and through itself, we will no more be able to conceive of appropriation than of knowledge, which is one of its forms; in the one case, as in the other, these will remain external relations that join, for a time, the subject to the object.  But, as we have seen, it is necessary to attribute substantial existence to any object of knowledge.  The same goes for property in general: it is a possessed object that exists in itself, and which is defined by permanence, a general atemporality, and a sufficiency of being—in short, by substantiality.  The Unselbstständigkeit must, therefore, be placed on the side of the possessing subject.  It is not possible for one substance to appropriate another substance, and, if we apprehend in things a certain quality of “ being possessed ,” it is because at its origin the for-itself’s internal relation to the in-itself that is its property originates in the for-itself’s insufficiency of being.  It goes without saying that the possessed object is not really affected by the act of appropriation, any more than a known object is affected by knowledge: it remains untouched (apart from the case in which the possessed thing is a human being, a slave, a prostitute, etc.).  But this quality of being possessed does not affect it any less ideally , in its signification: its meaning, in brief, is to reflect this possession to the for-itself.  If the possessor and the possessed are joined by an internal relation based on the for-itself’s insufficiency of being, the question that arises is how to determine the nature and meaning of the couple that they form.  As the internal relation is in fact synthetic, it brings about a unification of the possessor and the possessed.  In other words, the possessor and the possessed constitute, ideally, a single reality.  To possess something is to be joined with a possessed object in the way of appropriation; to want to possess something is to want to be joined to an object through this relation.  Thus the desire for a particular object is not simply the desire for this object; it is the desire to be joined to this object through an internal relation, in such a way as to constitute with it the unity of the “possessor-possessed.” The desire to have is basically reducible to the desire to be related to a specific object in a specific relation of being .  To determine this relation, our preceding remarks about the scholar’s, the artist’s, and the sportsman’s behavior will be most useful.  In each of these forms of behavior, we discerned a certain appropriative attitude.  And, in each case, a feature of the appropriation was that the object appeared to us both as a subjective emanation of ourselves and, at one and the same time, in a relation of indifferent externality with us.  The mine therefore appeared to us as a relation of being that is intermediate between the absolute internality of the me and the absolute externality of the not-me .  In the same syncretic movement, it is the me becoming not-me and the not-me becoming me.  But we must give a better description of this relation.  In the project of possession, we encounter an “ unselbstständig ” for-itself, separated by a nothingness from the possibility that it is.  This possibility is the possibility of appropriating the object .  In addition we encounter a value that haunts the for-itself and which is like an ideal indication of the total being that would be actualized through the union in identity of the possible and the for-itself which is its possible, i.e., in this case the being that would be actualized if I were in the indissoluble unity of the identical, myself and my property.  In this way appropriation would be a relation of being between a for-itself and a concrete in-itself, and this relation would be haunted by the ideal indication of an identification between this for-itself and the possessed in-itself.  To possess something is for it to belong to me , 35 i.e., for me to be the true purpose of the object’s existence.  Where the possession is given concretely and completely, the possessor is the possessed object’s raison d’être .  I possess this pen; in other words, this pen exists for me , and it was made for me .  In the beginning, moreover, I am the one who makes the object that I want to possess for myself.  My bow and my arrows: these signify objects that I have made for myself.  The division of labor causes this initial relationship to fade but not to disappear.  Luxury is a degraded version of it; in luxury’s primitive form, I possess an object that I have had made for me, by people who are mine (slaves, servants born in the house).  Luxury is therefore the form of property that comes closest to primitive property and which throws the next best light, after it, on the relation of creation by which appropriation is originally constituted.  This relation, in a society where the division of labor is pushed to the limit, is masked but not eliminated: the object that I possess was bought by me.  Money represents my strength; it is less a possession in itself than an instrument for possessing.  That is why, apart from the very particular case of greed, money becomes effaced by its buying power: it is evanescent, made in order to disclose the object, the concrete thing; it has only a transitive being.  But to me it appears as a creative force: to buy an object is a symbolic action equivalent to creating the object.  That is why money is a synonym of power: not only because it is in fact capable of getting us what we desire but, and especially, because it represents the efficacy of my desire as such.  Precisely because it is transcended toward the thing, surpassed, and merely implicated , it represents my magical bond with the object.  Money eliminates the technical connection between the subject and the object and renders the desire immediately operative, like the wishes of legends.  Stop at a shop window with money in your pocket: the objects displayed are already more than halfway to being yours.  In this way money establishes a connection of appropriation between the for-itself and the total collection of objects in the world.  Through it desire is already, as such, informative and creative.  In this way, through a process of continuous degradation, the creative link is maintained between the subject and the object.  To have is in the first place to create .  And the property connection that is thereby established is a connection of continuous creation: the possessed object is inserted by me into the figure of my surroundings; its existence is determined by my situation and by its integration within this very situation.  My lamp is not only this electrical bulb, this lampshade, this wrought-iron base: it is a certain power to illuminate this office, these books, this table; it is a certain luminous shade of my nocturnal work, alongside my habits of reading or writing when it is late; it is animated, colored, defined by the way I use it; it is this use and only exists through it.  Isolated from my office and my work, placed within a lot of objects on the salesroom floor, it has been radically “extinguished”: it is no longer my lamp, not even a lamp in general; it has returned to its original materiality.  Thus I am responsible for the existence of my possessions within the human order.  Through my ownership, I raise them to a specific type of functional being, and my very life appears to me to be creative just because it perpetuates, through its continuity, the quality of being possessed in each of the objects in my possession: I draw into being, along with me, the collection that surrounds me.  If they are torn away from me, they die, just as my arm would die if someone tore it from me.  But the original and radical creative relation is a relation of emanation.  To teach us about this relation, we have at hand the difficulties encountered by the Cartesian theory of substance.  What I create—if, by “create,” I mean “bring matter and form into existence”—is myself.  The drama for the absolute creator—if he existed—would be the impossibility of leaving himself behind, because his creature could only be himself: from where in fact could its objectivity and its independence be drawn, since its form and its matter are mine ? Only some kind of inertia could make it resume its shape in front of me, but, in order even for that inertia to apply, I am required to support it in existence through an act of continuous creation.  Thus, to the extent to which I appear to myself as creating objects through the mere relation of appropriation , these objects are me .  The pen and the pipe, the garment, the office or the house: it is me .  The totality of my possessions reflects the totality of my being.  I am what I have .  It is me that I touch on this cup, on this ornament.  This mountain that I climb is me to the extent to which I conquer it; and when I am at its summit—when I have “won,” for the price of my effort, this wide perspective over the valley and surrounding peaks—I am the point of view; the panorama is me, expanded right up to the horizon, because it exists only through me, only for me.  But creation is an evanescent concept, capable of existing only through its movement.  Bring it to a halt, and it disappears.  At the extreme limits of its meaning, it is annihilated; either I am unable to find anything in it other than my pure subjectivity, or I encounter a naked and indifferent materiality that no longer bears any relation to me.  Creation can only be conceived and maintained as a continuous transition from one term to the other.  It must be the case that the object, in one single event of arising, is totally myself and totally independent of me.  And that is just what we believe possession achieves.  The possessed object—insofar as it is possessed—is a continuous creation, but it remains there nonetheless: it exists through itself, and it is in-itself; if I turn away from it, it does not thereby cease to exist; if I go away, it represents me in my office, in my bedroom, at this place in the world.  From the outset, it is impenetrable.  This pen is entirely me, even to the extent that I no longer even distinguish it from the act of writing, which is my act.  And yet, on the other hand, it is intact, and my ownership does not modify it; the relation between me and it is only an ideal relation.  In one sense, I enjoy the possession of my property if I surpass it toward its use, but, if I want to contemplate it, the relation of possession fades away, and I no longer understand what possessing something means.  The pipe is there, on the table, independent, indifferent.  I pick it up with my hands, I finger it, I contemplate it, in order to actualize this appropriation, but, just because these movements have the purpose of allowing me to enjoy this appropriation, they miss their goal; between my fingers I have only a piece of inert wood.  It is only when I surpass my objects toward a goal, when I make use of them, that I can enjoy their possession.  In this way, the relation of continuous creation encompasses within it, as its implicit contradiction, the independence—absolute and in itself—of created objects.  Possession is a magical relation; I am these objects that I possess, but outside and in confrontation with myself: I create them as independent of me; what I possess is myself , outside of myself, outside any subjectivity, like an in-itself that escapes me in every instant and whose creation I perpetuate in every instant.  But, precisely because I am always outside of myself elsewhere, like some unfinished thing who becomes acquainted with its being through what it is not, when I possess something, I alienate myself for the sole benefit of the possessed object.  The possessed thing is the strong term in the relation of possession: outside that, I am nothing but a possessing nothingness, nothing but the simple fact of possession, something incomplete, insufficient, whose sufficiency and completeness lie in that object over there.  In possession, I am my own foundation insofar as I exist in itself: indeed, insofar as possession is a continuous creation, I apprehend the possessed object as being founded by me in its being.  However, and on the one hand, to the extent that creation is an emanation, this object is reabsorbed within me, and is nothing but me while, on the other hand, to the extent that it is from the outset in-itself, it is not-me myself as I confront myself, objective, in itself, permanent, and impenetrable, existing in relation to myself in a relation of externality and indifference.  Thus I am the foundation of myself insofar as I exist indifferently, and as in-itself, in relation to myself.  Now, that is precisely what the project of being in-itself-for-itself consists in.  Because this ideal being is defined as an in-itself that might, as for-itself, be its own foundation, or as a for-itself whose original project would be not a way of being but a being—precisely the being-in-itself that it is.  We can see that appropriation is nothing other than the symbol of the for-itself’s ideal, or value.  The dyad of the possessing for-itself and the possessed in-itself is equivalent to the being who exists in order to possess itself, and whose possession is its own creation, i.e., God.  In this way, the possessor aims to enjoy the possession of his being in-itself, his being-outside.  By means of possession I retrieve an object-being that I can identify with my being-for-the-Other.  Through that very fact, the Other cannot surprise me; I already possess and enjoy the being that he wants to activate, i.e., myself-for-the-other.  Thus possession is, in addition, a defense against the other .  What is mine is myself as something nonsubjective, insofar as I am its free foundation.  Nonetheless, the symbolic and ideal nature of this relation cannot be overemphasized.  I can no more fulfill my original desire to be my own foundation of myself by means of appropriation than Freud’s patient can fulfill his Oedipus complex when he dreams that a soldier is killing the Tsar (i.e., his father).  That is why property appears to its owner to be given in eternity and, at the same time, as requiring an infinite time to materialize.  No act of utilization can truly actualize our appropriative enjoyment; instead, it refers to other appropriative acts, whose value is in each case merely incantatory.  To possess a bicycle is to be able, in the first instance, to look at it, and then to touch it.  But the action of touching it reveals itself to be insufficient; what is required is to be able to get on it and to go for a ride.  But this gratuitous ride is itself insufficient; the bicycle would need to be used to do some shopping.  And that refers us to uses that are longer, fuller—to long trips across France.  But these trips themselves fragment into a thousand appropriative undertakings, each of which refers to others.  In the end, as we might have predicted, it was enough to hold out a banknote for the bicycle to belong to me, but it will take my entire life to actualize this possession.  In acquiring an object, this is just what I sense: possession is an undertaking that death will leave always unfinished.  We are now able to grasp its meaning, which is that the relation symbolized by appropriation is impossible to achieve.  In itself, there is nothing concrete about appropriation.  It is not some real activity (like eating, drinking, sleeping, etc.) that can serve, in addition, as the symbol of a particular desire.  On the contrary, it exists only in the capacity of a symbol; its symbolism is what gives it its meaning, its cohesion, its existence.  We cannot, therefore, find any positive enjoyment in it outside its symbolic value; it is only an indication of a supreme enjoyment (that of the being that might be its own foundation), which always lies beyond all the appropriative undertakings which aim to achieve it.  It is precisely the for-itself’s recognition of the impossibility of possessing an object that brings in its wake a violent wish, on his part, to destroy it.  To destroy something is to absorb it into me, and to maintain a relation with the destroyed object’s being-in-itself as profound as that of creation.  The flames that burn the farm to which I have set fire gradually actualize the fusion of the farm with myself: in becoming annihilated, it changes into me .  Here I rediscover the relation of being that characterizes creation, but in reverse: I am the foundation of the burning barn; I am this barn, since I am destroying its being.  Destruction—more subtly, perhaps, than creation—actualizes our appropriation, because the destroyed object is no longer there to present itself as impenetrable.  It has the impenetrability and sufficiency of being of the in-itself that it has been ; but, at the same time, it has the invisibility and translucency of the nothingness that I am, since it is no longer .  This glass that I have broken, and which “was” on this table, is still there, but like an absolute transparency: all the beings that I can see are seen through it; this is what filmmakers have tried to convey by means of double exposure; it resembles a consciousness, even though it has the irreparability of the in-itself.  At the same time, it is positively mine because it is only the fact that I have to be what I was that keeps the destroyed object from becoming annihilated: I re-create it by re-creating myself.  In this way, to destroy something is to re-create it by assuming sole responsibility for the being of that which had existed for everyone .  Destruction should, therefore, be classified as an appropriative form of behavior.  Moreover, many appropriative undertakings have a structure that is, among other things, destructive: to utilize something is to use it up.  In using my bicycle, I use it up , which means that the appropriative continuous creation is marked by a partial destruction.  This process of becoming used up may, for strictly utilitarian reasons, be distressing, but, in the majority of cases, it causes a secret pleasure, almost enjoyment: that is because it comes from us ; we are consuming .  36 We may observe that this expression “consumption” can refer to an appropriative destruction and at the same time to our enjoyment of food.  To consume something is to annihilate it and to eat it; it is to destroy it by incorporating it.  If I ride my bicycle I may be vexed that I am using up the tires, because it is difficult to get others; but the image of enjoyment that I enact with my body is that of a destructive appropriation, a “creation-destruction.” The bicycle, by gliding along, and carrying me, and in its very movement, is created and made my own; but this creation impresses itself deeply into the object through the light and continuous wearing away of it that is imparted to it, and which is like the mark branded on a slave.  The object belongs to me because I am the one who used it; the using up of what is mine is the reverse side of my life.  37 These observations enable us to better understand the meaning of certain feelings or modes of behavior that are usually regarded as irreducible—for example, generosity .  Indeed, the gift is a primitive form of destruction.  We know that the potlatch, for example, involves the destruction of enormous quantities of commodities.  These acts of destruction challenge the other, and bind him in chains.  At this level it makes no difference whether the object is destroyed or given to the other: in one way or the other, the potlatch is an act of destruction and an enchaining of the other.  In giving it away, I destroy the object just as much as by annihilating it: I eliminate the quality of being mine that profoundly constituted it in its being, and I remove it from my sight; I constitute it—in relation to my table, my bedroom—as absent ; I alone will preserve for it the spectral and transparent being of past objects, because I am the one through whom these beings pursue an honorary existence after their annihilation.  Thus the function of generosity is, above all else, destructive.  The zeal for giving things by which some people are sometimes overcome is, above all else, a zeal for destruction, and equivalent to the attitude of a maniac, a “love” that keeps company with the smashing of objects.  But this zeal for destruction that lies at the bottom of generosity is nothing other than a zeal to possess.  Everything I give up, everything I give away, can be enjoyed in a superior way through the gift that I make of it: the gift is a bitter and brief enjoyment, almost sexual; to give something is to possessively enjoy the object that is given, to make a destructive-appropriative contact.  But at the same time the gift casts a spell over the person to whom it is given: it obliges him to re-create, to sustain in being through a continuous creation, this “me” that I no longer want, and that has just—until its annihilation—been my possession, and of which nothing finally remains but an image.  To give is to enslave.  This aspect of the gift is not what interests us here, because it concerns above all our relations with the other.  What we have aimed to point out is that generosity is not irreducible: to give is to appropriate by means of destruction, by making use of this destruction to enslave the other.  Generosity is, therefore, a feeling that is structured by the Other’s existence and which indicates a preference for appropriation through destruction .  It thereby leads us even more in the direction of nothingness than toward the in-itself (what is involved is a nothingness of the in-itself that is itself, obviously, in-itself but which, insofar as it is nothingness, can stand in a symbolic relation to the being that is its own nothingness).  If, therefore, existential psychoanalysis comes across evidence of a subject’s generosity , it must search further for his original project, and ask why the subject has chosen to appropriate by means of destruction rather than by creation.  The answer to this question will disclose the original relation to being by which the person being studied is constituted.  These observations aimed only to bring to light the ideal character of the appropriative bond and the symbolic function of all appropriative behavior.  We must add that the symbol is not deciphered by the subject himself.  That is not because the symbol is prepared within some unconscious but because of the very structure of being-in-the-world.  Indeed we saw, in the chapter about transcendence, that the ordering of equipment in the world was the image, projected into the in-itself, of my possibilities—i.e., the image of what I am—but that I would never be able to decipher this worldly image because it would take nothing less than the scissiparity of reflection for me to become, in relation to myself, something like the first draft of an object.  Thus, as the circuit of ipseity is non-thetic—and, in consequence, my acquaintance with what I am remains non-thematic—this “being-in-itself” of myself that is sent back to me by the world can only be concealed from my knowledge .  I can only adapt myself to it in and through the proximate action through which it is born.  So to possess something does not mean at all that one knows oneself to be identified with the possessed object in a relation of creation-destruction but precisely that one is in this relation or, better still, that one is this relation .  And the possessed object has an immediately apprehensible quality for us which transforms it entirely—the quality of being mine —but this quality is in itself quite indecipherable, it is revealed in and through action, it makes manifest that it has a specific meaning, but the moment we want to withdraw in relation to the object and to contemplate it, it vanishes without revealing its innermost structure and meaning.  Indeed, this withdrawal is in itself destructive of the appropriative bond: in the previous instant I was committed within the ideal totality and, precisely because I was committed in my being, I was unable to know it; in the next instant the totality has broken and I am unable to discover its meaning from the disconnected pieces that composed it, as we can see in that contemplative experience—known as “depersonalization”—that some patients undergo in spite of themselves.  We are therefore obliged to turn to existential psychoanalysis to disclose to us the meaning, in each particular case, of this appropriative synthesis whose general and abstract sense we have just defined by means of ontology.  What remains to be defined in general is the signification of the possessed object.  This inquiry should complete our knowledge of the appropriative project.  What, therefore, are we seeking to appropriate? We can easily see, on the one hand and in abstract terms, that what we primarily aim to possess is not so much the object’s way of being as the object’s being itself.  (Indeed, it is in its capacity as a concrete representative of being-in-itself that we desire to appropriate the object or, in other words, to apprehend ourself as the foundation of its being insofar as it is, ideally, ourself.) On the other hand, and in empirical terms, we can see that the appropriate object never counts for itself alone , or for its particular use.  No particular act of appropriation has meaning outside its indefinite extensions; the pen I possess is equivalent to all pens; what I possess, in person in the pen, is the class of pens.  But, in addition, what I possess in it is the possibility of writing, of drawing strokes with a certain shape and color (because I contaminate the instrument itself, and the ink that I am using): these strokes, their color, their meaning, are condensed within it just as much as the paper, its special resistance, its smell, etc.  The crystallizing synthesis that Stendhal described in the case of love alone occurs in relation to all possession.  38 Every possessed object, detached against the ground of the world, manifests the entire world—as a beloved woman manifests the sky, the beach, the sea that surrounded her when she appeared.  To appropriate this object is, therefore, symbolically to appropriate the world.  Anyone can recognize this, by referring to their experience; for myself, I will cite a personal example, not by way of proof but to guide the reader’s inquiry.  Some years ago, I came to the decision that I would no longer smoke.  The beginning was tough and, really, I was less concerned by the taste of tobacco that I was going to lose than by the meaning of the act of smoking.  An entire crystallization had occurred: I would smoke at the theater, in the morning while I worked, in the evening after dinner, and it seemed to me that by ceasing to smoke I would remove the interest of the play, the flavor of the evening meal, the fresh brightness of the morning’s work.  No matter how the unexpected event which struck my eyes was meant to be, it seemed to me that it was fundamentally impoverished once I could no longer be smoking as I greeted it.  To-be-capable-of-being-encountered-by-me-as-I-smoked: such was the concrete quality that had become universally spread across things.  It seemed to me that I was going to seize this quality from them and that, in the midst of this universal impoverishment, life was a bit less worth living.  Now, smoking is an appropriative destructive reaction.  The tobacco is a symbol of “appropriated” being, since it is destroyed to the rhythm of my breath by a manner of “continuous destruction,” and passes into me, and since its becoming me is symbolically manifested by the transformation into smoke of the solid substance that I consume.  The connection of the landscape that is seen as one smokes with this little crematory sacrifice was, we have just seen, such as to make the latter appear as the symbol of the former.  That means therefore that the reaction of destructive appropriation of the tobacco was symbolically equivalent to an appropriative destruction of the entire world.  Through the tobacco I was smoking, it was the world that was burning, smoking itself, disappearing into smoke in order to enter into me.  To keep to my decision I had to accomplish a kind of decrystallization, which is to say that, without paying undue attention to this, I reduced the tobacco to being no longer anything but itself: a burning herb.  I cut its symbolic links to the world, and persuaded myself that I would remove nothing from the theatrical performance, from the landscape, from the book I was reading, if I considered them without my pipe; in other words, I made do with ways of possessing these objects other than this sacrificial ceremony.  As soon as I was persuaded by this, my regret was reduced to a small thing: I lamented the fact that I would no longer sense the smell of the smoke, the heat of the bowl between my fingers, etc.  But the result was that my regret was disarmed and became easy to bear.  Thus what we desire to appropriate in an object is fundamentally its being, and the world.  These two appropriative ends amount in reality to just one.  I seek to possess, behind the phenomenon, the being of the phenomenon.  But this being, which, as we saw, is quite different from the phenomenon of being, is being-in-itself and not only the being of some particular thing.  It is not that there is a transition to the universal here but rather the being, considered in its concrete nudity, thereby becomes the being of the totality.  In this way we can see the relation of possession appear clearly: to possess is to want to possess the world through a particular object.  And as possession is defined as an attempt to take hold of a being, in the capacity of a foundation, insofar as it is, ideally, ourself, any possessive project aims to constitute the for-itself as the foundation of the world or the concrete totality of the in-itself, insofar as this totality is, as a totality, the for-itself itself, existing in the mode of the in-itself.  Being-in-the-world is the project of possessing the world, i.e., of taking hold of the whole world as that which is missing from the for-itself in order for it to become in-itself-for-itself; it is to be committed within a totality, which is precisely the ideal, or value, or the totalized totality and which would be ideally constituted through the fusion of the for-itself, as a detotalized totality that has to be what it is, with the world, as the totality of the in-itself that is what it is.  Indeed, as we must fully understand, the for-itself’s project is not to found a being in reason, i.e., a being that it conceives first—in form and in matter—in order thereafter to give it existence: such a being would, in effect, be purely abstract, a universal; its conception cannot come before its being-in-the-world but, on the contrary, presupposes it, as it presupposes the preontological understanding of a type of being that is eminently concrete and present from the outset, which is the “there” of the for-itself’s initial being-there, i.e., the being of the world.  The for-itself does not exist first in order to think the universal, and to determine itself according to concepts: it is its choice and its choice cannot be abstract; otherwise the for-itself’s very being would be abstract.  The for-itself’s being is an individual adventure, and its choice must be the individual choice of a concrete being.  That is true, as we have seen, for the situation in general.  The for-itself’s choice is always the choice of a concrete situation in its incomparable singularity.  But that is also true of the ontological meaning of that choice.  When we say that the for-itself is a project to be , it does not conceive of the being-in-itself that it projects to be as a structure shared by all existents of a certain type; as we saw, its project is in no way a conception.  39 What the for-itself projects to be appears to it as an eminently concrete totality: it is this being.  And of course we can foresee in this project the possibilities of a universalizing development, but in the way in which we may say of some lover that he loves all women, or all of woman, in one woman.  As this concrete being whose foundation he projects to be cannot be conceived , as we have just seen, because it is concrete, it cannot be imagined either, because the imaginary is a nothingness and this being is eminently being.  It must exist , which is to say it must be encountered , but its encounter amounts to no more than the choice that the for-itself makes.  The for-itself is a choice-encounter, i.e., it determines itself as the choice to found the being that it encounters.  That means the for-itself, as an individual undertaking, is the choice of this world , as the individual totality of being; it does not surpass it toward a logical universality but toward a new concrete “state” of the same world, in which being would be in-itself founded by the for-itself—which is to say that it surpasses it toward a concrete-being-beyond-the-existing-concrete-being.  In this way being-in-the-world is a project to possess this world, and the value that haunts the for-itself is the concrete indication of an individual being constituted through the synthetic function of this for-itself here and this world here .  In effect being, wherever it is, wherever it comes from and from whatever standpoint we consider it—whether in-itself or for-itself or the impossible ideal of the in-itself-for-itself—is, in its primary contingency, an individual adventure.  Thus we are able to determine the relations that unite the categories of being and having.  We have seen that desire may at the outset be the desire to be or the desire to have.  But the desire to have is not irreducible.  While the desire to be bears directly on the for-itself, and projects to confer upon it without intermediary the dignity of in-itself-for-itself, the desire to have targets the for-itself upon, within, and through the world.  It is through the appropriation of the world that the project to have aims to actualize the same value as the desire to be.  That is why these desires, which we can distinguish analytically, are in reality inseparable: we can find no desire to be that is not coupled with a desire to have, and vice versa ; basically, it is a matter of two directions of attention in relation to a single goal or, alternatively, of two interpretations of the same fundamental situation, of which one aspires to confer being on the for-itself directly, and the other to establish the circuit of ipseity, which is to say by inserting the world between the for-itself and its being.  As for the original situation, it is the lack in being that I am, which is to say that I make myself be.  But precisely that being, which I make into my own lack, is absolutely individual and concrete: it is being that already exists and in the midst of which I arise as missing it .  Thus the very nothingness that I am is individual and concrete, as being this nihilation and not another.  Every for-itself is a free choice; each of its actions, the most insignificant and the most important, translates this choice and emanates from it; it is to this that we have given the name freedom.  Now we have grasped the meaning of this choice: it is a choice of being, either directly or through the appropriation of the world or, rather, both at once.  In this way my freedom is the choice to be God, and all my actions and all my projects translate this choice and reflect it in a thousand different ways, for there are an infinite number of ways of being and ways of having.  The aim of existential psychoanalysis is to find, through these empirical and concrete projects, the original way in which each person chooses his being.  But, it might be said, we still need to explain why I choose to possess the world through this particular thing or that .  We can reply that this is precisely what is distinctive of freedom.  However, the object itself is not irreducible.  In it, we aim at its being , through its way of being or quality.  And, as a way of being, quality—in particular material quality, the fluidity of water, the density of stone, etc.—only presentifies being in a specific way.  What we choose therefore is a specific way in which being is disclosed and comes to be possessed.  For us, yellow and red, the taste of tomato or of split peas, the rough and the soft, are not at all irreducible givens: we see them as symbolic expressions of a specific way in which being can offer itself, and we react with disgust or desire according to the way in which we see being show up in them.  Existential psychoanalysis has to draw out the ontological meaning of qualities.  It is only in this way—and not by means of sexual considerations—that we can explain, for example, certain constants in the “imaginations” of poets (the “geological” in Rimbaud, the fluidity of water in Poe) or, quite simply, each person’s tastes , those famous tastes about which we say we should not argue, without realizing that they symbolize in their way an entire “ Weltanschauung ,” an entire choice of being, and that this explains why they appear obvious to the person who has made them his.  We should, therefore, sketch out this particular task of existential psychoanalysis here, as a suggestion for further research.  For the irreducibility of free choice does not lie at the level of a person’s taste for the sweet, or the bitter, etc., but at the level of his choice of the aspect of being to be revealed through and by means of the sweet, the bitter, etc.  III.  THE REVELATION OF BEING THROUGH QUALITIES It is quite simply a matter of attempting a psychoanalysis of things .  This is what M.  Bachelard has tried to do, with great talent, in his latest book, Water and Dreams .  40 This work holds great promise; in particular, the discovery of the “material imagination” is a genuine advance.  In truth, the term “imagination” is not appropriate, and nor is this aspiration to seek, behind things and their gelatinous, solid, or fluid matter, the “images” that we project into them.  As we have demonstrated elsewhere, 41 perception has nothing in common with the imagination: on the contrary, it strictly excludes it, and vice versa .  To perceive is not in any way to assemble images out of sensations: we should abandon these claims of associationist origin entirely and, in consequence, the task of psychoanalysis will not be to look for images but rather to explicate the meanings that really belong to things.  Doubtless, the “human” meaning of stickiness , of viscosity , etc., does not belong to the in-itself.  But, as we have seen, potentialities do not belong to it either, and yet the world is constituted by them.  Material meanings—the human meaning of icicles, of the granular, the compressed, the fatty, etc.—are just as real as the world, no more and no less, and to come into the world is to arise in the midst of these meanings.  But no doubt this is merely a difference of terminology; and M.  Bachelard seems less fearful, and to communicate the nub of his thinking when he talks in his lectures about psychoanalysing plants or entitles one of his works The Psychoanalysis of Fire .  In fact, the method of objective deciphering is not to be applied to the subject but to things, and it does not presuppose any antecedent reference to the subject.  When, for example, I want to determine the objective meaning of snow, I see, for example, that at certain temperatures it melts and that the melting of the snow is its death.  There we have merely an objective statement of fact.  And when I want to determine the meaning of this melting, I am obliged to compare it to other objects, situated in other regions of existence but equally objective, and equally transcendent, such as ideas, friendships, or people, of whom I can also say that they melt (money melts in my hands; I am dripping with sweat; I melt into water; some ideas—in the sense of objective social meanings—will “snowball,” while others melt away; 42 he has become so much thinner, so melted down).  In this way, no doubt, I will arrive at a specific relation, linking certain forms of being to certain others.  The comparison of melting snow to certain other, more mysterious forms of melting (for example, in the content of various old myths: the tailor in Grimms’ tales picks up a cheese in his hands, pretends that it is a stone, squeezes it so hard that the whey drips out of it; the witnesses believe that he has squeezed drops out of a stone, that he has expressed the liquid out of it) may inform us of a secret liquidity of things, in the sense in which Audiberti, with true inspiration, spoke of the secret blackness of milk.  43 This liquidity, which should itself be compared to the juice of fruit and to man’s blood—which is in addition something like our secret and vital liquidity—refers us to a specific permanent possibility: the metamorphosis of something compact and granular (designating a certain quality of being of the pure in-itself ) into a homogeneous and undifferentiated fluidity (another quality of being of the pure in-itself).  And here we grasp, at its origin and in all its ontological meaning, the antinomy of the continuous and the discontinuous, the feminine and masculine poles of the world, whose later dialectical development we will see, right up to quantum theory and wave mechanics.  Thus, we will succeed in deciphering snow’s secret meaning, which is an ontological meaning.  But where, in all that, is there any relation to subjectivity? To the imagination? We have only compared some wholly objective structures and formulated the hypothesis which may unify and group these structures together.  That is why psychoanalysis applies, in this case, to the things themselves, and not to the men.  It is also why I would be more cautious than M.  Bachelard about any recourse at this level to the material imaginations of poets, even such poets as Lautréamont, Rimbaud, or Poe.  Of course, it is fascinating to investigate “Lautréamont’s Bestiary.” But if in this investigation we have indeed returned to subjectivity, we will only obtain any truly significant results if we regard Lautréamont as an original and pure preference for animality 44 and if we have first determined animality’s objective meaning.  45 If in fact Lautréamont is what he prefers , we must in the first place know the nature of what he prefers.  And, of course, we know quite well that his “input” into animality will be different and greater than mine.  But these subjective enrichments which tell us about Lautréamont are polarized by the basic structure of animality.  That is why the existential psychoanalysis of Lautréamont presupposes in the first place that the objective sense of animal has been deciphered.  Similarly, I have dreamt for a long time of establishing a lapidary for Rimbaud.  But what sense would that have if we had not antecedently established the meaning of the geological in general? But, one might object, a meaning presupposes man.  We do not disagree.  Only man, being a transcendence, establishes significance even as he arises, and any signifier, by virtue of the very structure of a transcendence, involves a reference to other transcendent items that can be deciphered without any recourse to the subjectivity that established it.  A body’s potential energy is an objective quality of that body which must be able to be objectively calculated, by taking account uniquely of objective circumstances.  And yet this energy can come to inhabit a body only in a world whose appearing is correlative to that of a for-itself.  Similarly we can discover, by means of a strictly objective psychoanalysis, other potentialities that are more deeply engaged in the matter of things and which remain wholly transcendent, even though they correspond to a still more fundamental choice of human-reality, a choice of being .  This leads us to clarify the second point on which we differ from M.  Bachelard.  Certainly, any psychoanalysis must indeed have its a priori principles.  It must know, in particular, what it is looking for ; otherwise how could it find it? But as the goal of his research cannot itself be established by the psychoanalyst without incurring a vicious circle, it must be the object of a postulate—either sought from experience, or established through some other discipline.  Freud’s libido is obviously a straightforward postulate: Adler’s will to power seems to be a generalization without method from empirical data—and in fact it must lack a method, since it is what allows the basis of psychoanalytic method to be laid down.  M.  Bachelard seems to rely on these precursors; the postulate of sexuality seems to dominate his research; at other times he refers us to death , to the trauma of birth, to the will to power; in short, his psychoanalysis seems to be surer of its method than of its principles and no doubt it counts on its results to throw light on the exact goal of its research.  But this puts the cart before the horse; consequences will never enable a principle to be established, any more than the sum of its finite modes will enable us to grasp the substance.  It seems to us therefore that we need to abandon these empirical principles or these postulates which make man, a priori , a sexuality or a will to power and that we should establish the goal of psychoanalysis rigorously, on the basis of ontology.  This is what we tried to do in the preceding paragraph.  We saw that, long before it can be described as libido or will to power, human-reality is a choice of being , either directly or through the appropriation of the world.  And we saw that—when the choice is directed on appropriation—each thing is chosen, in the last analysis, not for its sexual potential but according to the way in which it renders being, the way in which being shows on its surface.  A psychoanalysis of things and their matter must therefore be concerned above all to establish the way in which each thing is the objective symbol of being and human-reality’s relation to this being.  We do not deny the need, after that, to uncover in nature an entire sexual symbolism, but this is a secondary and reducible layer whose precondition is a psychoanalysis of the pre-sexual structures.  Thus we regard M.  Bachelard’s study of water, which teems with ingenious and profound insights, as an assembly of suggestions, like a precious collection of materials which we ought now to make use of, in a psychoanalysis that is conscious of its principles.  What ontology can in fact teach psychoanalysis is first of all the true origin of the meanings of things and their true relation to human-reality.  Indeed, only ontology is capable of situating itself at the level of transcendence, and grasping being-in-the-world with its two terms, because it alone takes up from the outset the perspective of the cogito .  Again it is the idea of facticity and of situation which will enable us to understand the existential symbolism of things.  We have seen, indeed, that it is possible theoretically—and impossible practically—to distinguish facticity from the project that constitutes it into the situation.  We must make use of this observation here: in fact, as we have seen, it would be wrong to believe that a this , in the indifferent externality of its being and independently of the for-itself’s arising, could have any meaning whatever.  Of course, its quality , as we have seen, is nothing other than its being.  The lemon’s yellow, we said, is not a subjective mode of apprehension of the lemon: it is the lemon .  We have also shown 46 that the entire lemon extends through its qualities and that each of these qualities extends throughout the others; that is exactly what we are calling a this .  Every quality of a being is the being as a whole; it is the presence of its absolute contingency, its irreducible indifference.  However, we have been emphasizing since Part Two the inseparability, even within a quality, of project and facticity.  In fact we wrote: “In order for there to be a quality, it is necessary that there is being for a nothingness that, by its nature, is not being… quality is a disclosure of being in its entirety, within the limits of the there is .” 47 Thus, from the outset, we cannot accredit quality’s meaning to being in itself , since the “there is”—i.e., the nihilating mediation of the for-itself—is already required for there to be any qualities.  But on the basis of these remarks we will easily understand that the meaning of quality registers in its turn something akin to a strengthening of the “there is,” since it is exactly where we find the foothold in order to surpass the “there is” toward being as it is absolutely and in itself.  In each apprehension of quality there is, in this sense, a metaphysical attempt to escape our condition, to pierce the casing of nothingness of the “there is” and to penetrate right through to the pure in-itself.  But obviously we can only apprehend quality as the symbol of a being which escapes us totally, even though it is there totally, in front of us, which is to say, in short, to make revealed being function as a symbol of being in itself.  That means precisely that a new structure of the “there is” is constituted, which is the signifying layer, even though this layer is revealed within the absolute unity of the same fundamental project.  We will call that the metaphysical tenor of each intuitive revelation of being; and that is exactly what we should arrive at and disclose by means of psychoanalysis.  What is the metaphysical tenor of yellow, of red, of the smooth and the coarse? What is—a question we will raise after these elementary questions—the metaphysical coefficient of a lemon, of water, of oil, etc.? There are so many problems here, which psychoanalysis is obliged to resolve if it wants one day to understand why Pierre loves oranges and hates water, why he will happily eat tomato but refuses to eat broad beans, why he vomits if he is forced to swallow oysters or raw eggs.  Only we have also shown what a mistake it would be, for example, to think that we “project” our affective dispositions onto the thing, to illuminate or color it.  First, we saw in fact a long time ago that a feeling is not at all an inner disposition but a transcendent and objectifying relation, which learns from its object what it is.  But that is not all: an example will show us that the explanation in terms of projection (which is the sense of the all-too-familiar “a landscape is a state of mind”) 48 begs the question.  Let us take, for example, the particular quality known as the viscous .  It is certain that for a European adult it signifies a host of human and moral characteristics that are easily reducible to relations of being.  A handshake is sticky or viscous; a smile is unctuous or viscous; a thought, a feeling, can be viscous.  49 The received view is that in the first instance I have experienced certain displeasing modes of behavior and moral attitudes which I condemn and that, on the other hand, I have a sensory intuition of something viscous.  Thereafter I come to establish a connection between these feelings and viscosity, and the viscous comes to function as a symbol for an entire class of human feelings and attitudes.  I will therefore have enriched the viscous, by projecting onto it my knowledge concerning this human category of behavior.  But how can we accept this explanation in terms of projection? If we suppose that we have in the first instance grasped our feelings as pure psychological qualities, how could we grasp their relation to viscosity? The feeling, grasped in its qualitative purity, could only be revealed as a specific, wholly non-extended disposition that is, in relation to particular values and particular consequences, blameworthy; in any case, it will not appear “as an image” if the image is not given first.  And, on the other hand, if the viscous does not originally carry any affective meaning, if it is given only as a specific material quality, we are unable to see how it could ever be chosen as the symbolic representative of some specific psychological units.  In brief, in order to establish a symbolic relation consciously and clearly between viscosity and the tacky low behavior of certain individuals, we would need to have already grasped the lowness in the viscosity, and the viscosity in certain kinds of lowness.  It follows therefore that the explanation by projection explains nothing, since it presupposes what was supposed to be explained.  Moreover, even if it escaped that objection of principle, it would only meet another one, which is drawn from experience and is no less serious: the explanation by projection implies in fact that the projecting subject has attained, through experience and analysis, a certain knowledge of the structure and effects of the attitudes that he comes to describe as “viscous.” According to this view, indeed, the recourse to viscosity does not enrich our experience of human lowness in the manner of knowledge ; at the most, it offers a thematic unity, an image used to classify items of knowledge we have already acquired.  On the other hand, if we consider it in isolation, viscosity in the strict sense may appear to us to be harmful in practical terms (because viscous substances stick to our hands, our clothes, because they stain), but not repugnant .  We cannot in fact explain the disgust they inspire in us by means of the contamination of this physical quality with certain moral qualities.  There must therefore exist some kind of process through which we learn the symbolic meaning of viscosity.  But observation teaches us that the youngest children show signs of repulsion, in the presence of anything viscous, as if it were already contaminated by the mind; it also teaches us that they understand , as soon as they can speak, the value of words like “soft,” “low,” etc.  when these are used to describe feelings.  It is as if, in the universe in which we first arise, feelings and actions are laden with materiality, and composed like a substance: they are really soft, flat, viscous, low, high, etc.; and material substances have a psychological meaning from the outset that makes them repugnant, horrifying, attractive, etc.  No explanation in terms of projection or analogy is adequate here.  And, to sum up, it is just as impossible for us to derive the value of a psychological symbol of the viscous from the brute quality of a this as it is for us to project this meaning onto the this on the basis of a knowledge of the psychological attitudes in question.  How therefore should we conceive of this immense universal symbolism which is expressed in our hatreds, our likings, our attractions, for objects whose materiality ought in principle to remain meaningless? To make any progress in this study, we are required to give up a certain number of assumptions.  In particular, we must no longer postulate a priori that the attribution of viscosity to such and such a feeling is only an image, and not an item of knowledge—and we should also refuse to allow, before we have further information, that it is our psychology that allows physical matter to become symbolically informed, and that our experience of human lowness is prior to our apprehension of the “viscous” as meaningful.  Let us return to the original project.  It is a project of appropriation.  It obliges therefore the viscous to reveal its being; as the mode in which the for-itself arises in being is appropriative, the viscous is perceived as something “viscous to possess,” which is to say that the original bond between me and the viscous is that I have the project to be the foundation of its being, insofar as, ideally, it is myself.  From the outset, therefore, it appears as a possible myself to be founded; from the origin it is psychologized .  That does not mean at all that I endow it either with a soul, as in primitive animism, or with metaphysical powers but only that its materiality itself is revealed to me as having a psychological meaning—this psychological meaning, moreover, being one and the same as its symbolic value in relation to being-in-itself.  We may regard this appropriative way of making the viscous render all its meanings as something a priori and formal, even though it is a free project and identified with the for-itself’s own being, since it does not depend primarily on the way of being that belongs to the viscous but only on its brute being-there, its pure, encountered existence.  Any other appropriative encounter will be the same, insofar as it is a mere project of appropriation, and not in any way distinct from the pure “there is,” and insofar as it is, depending on our way of seeing it, a pure freedom or a pure nothingness.  But it is precisely within the scope of this appropriative project that the viscous discloses and develops its viscosity.  This viscosity is therefore already —from the first appearance of anything viscous—an answer to a question, already a gift of itself : the viscous appears already as a first draft of the world’s fusion with me; and what I learn about it, its character as a ventouse that sucks me in , 50 is already a reply to a concrete question; it answers with its very being, with its way of being, with its entire matter.  And the answer that is given is fully fitted to the question, and at the same time opaque and indecipherable because it is rich with all its indescribable materiality.  It is clear insofar as it exactly fits the question: the viscous allows itself to be apprehended as what is missing from me; it allows itself to be palpated in an appropriative inquiry; to this first sketch of an appropriation, it uncovers its viscosity.  It is opaque precisely because, if the for-itself is what awakens a meaningful figure within the viscous, it is with all of its viscosity that the latter comes to fill it.  It sends back therefore a full and dense meaning, and this meaning surrenders being-in-itself to us, insofar as the world is, at present, being manifested by the viscous and also a first sketch of ourselves , insofar as the act of appropriation sketches out something like a founding of the viscous.  What approaches us then, like an objective quality, is a new nature which is neither material (and physical) nor psychological but which transcends the opposition between the physical and the psychological by disclosing itself to us as the ontological expression of the world in its entirety, i.e., it offers itself as a category for classifying all the thises in the world, whether they are material structures or transcended transcendences.  Therefore, and by the same token, our apprehension of the viscous as such has created a particular way for the world’s in-itself to present itself; it symbolizes being in its own way, which means that, for as long as our contact with the viscous lasts, it is for us as if viscosity were the meaning of the entire world, i.e., being-in-itself’s sole mode of being, just as, for the primitive people of the lizard clan, all objects are lizards.  51 What, in the example we have chosen, might be the mode of being symbolized by the viscous? In the first place I can see that it is the homogeneity and imitation of liquidity.  A viscous substance, like pitch, is an aberrant fluid.  First, it seems to us to manifest a being which runs away in all directions, and everywhere resembles itself, a being which escapes from all sides and on which, however, we are able to float, a being without danger and without memory, changing eternally into itself, on which we make no mark, and which makes no mark on us, a being which glides, and on which we can glide, and which we can possess by gliding (a rowboat, a motorboat, water-skiing, etc.), and which—because it rolls over you—never possesses anything, a being that consists in eternity and infinite temporality, because it is a constant process of change in which nothing changes and which—through this synthesis of eternity and temporality—provides the best symbol of a possible fusion of the for-itself, as pure temporality, with the in-itself, as pure eternity.  But immediately the viscous is revealed as essentially suspect, because its fluidity exists in slow motion; it is a thickening of liquidity, which by itself represents solidity’s rising triumph over the liquid or—in other words—a tendency of the indifferent in-itself (represented by the pure solid) to freeze liquidity, i.e., to absorb the for-itself that ought to be founding it.  The viscous is water in the throes of death: it presents itself as a phenomenon of becoming; it does not have water’s permanence in change but represents, on the contrary, something like a cross-section made through a changing state.  This frozen instability of the viscous discourages possession.  Water flows faster, but it can be possessed even as it escapes, as running water.  The viscous escapes in a thick flow, which no more resembles that of water than the heavy low-level flight of a chicken resembles that of a sparrowhawk.  And this flight itself cannot be possessed, because it negates itself as flight.  It is almost, already, a solid permanence.  Nothing testifies better to this suspect character of a “substance between two states” than the slowness with which the viscous merges into itself: a drop of water touching the surface of a stretch of water is instantaneously transmuted into the stretch of water; we do not apprehend the operation as the absorption of the drop, mouth-like, by the expanse but rather as a spiritualization and dis-individuation of a particular being, which dissolves by itself into the greater whole from which it came.  The symbol of an expanse of water seems to play a very important role in the constitution of pantheistic systems; it reveals a particular type of being’s relation with being.  But if we examine the viscous, we observe (even though it has mysteriously retained all its fluidity, in slow motion; we should not confuse it with a purée, where the incipient fluidity sustains sudden breaks, sudden blockages, and where the substance, after beginning to pour , suddenly rolls over into a ball) that, in the phenomenon of its transmutation into itself, it shows a constant hysteresis: the honey that runs off my spoon onto the honey in the pot begins by sculpting its surface, it stands out in relief, and its fusion into the whole takes on the aspect of a collapse, a diminution which resembles a deflation (think of the impact, on a child’s sensibility, of the inflatable man who is “blown” like a glass, and lets out a frightful wailing as he deflates) and, at the same time, the spreading and flattening of the rather mature breasts of a woman lying stretched out on her back.  In this viscous substance melting into itself there is in fact, at the same time, a visible resistance, like the refusal of an individual who does not want to be annihilated in being as a whole and, at the same time, a softness taken to its furthest extreme: because something soft is nothing but an annihilation that is stopped midway; the soft provides us with the best image of our own destructive power and its limits.  The slowness with which the viscous drop disappears into the whole is taken at first for softness , since it is like an annihilation that has been held back, which seems to be playing for time: but this softness is taken to its conclusion; the drop sinks into the viscous expanse.  Several features of the viscous emerge from this phenomenon: first, that its contact is soft .  Throw some water on to the ground: it flows .  Throw a viscous substance: it stretches out and flattens, and it is soft ; touch something viscous, and it does not move away but it yields.  There is a pitiless hardness to water’s very elusiveness which gives it a secret metallic meaning; in the end it is impossible to compress, like steel.  The viscous may be compressed.  At first, therefore, it gives the impression of a being that can be possessed .  It does this in two ways: its viscosity and its adherence to itself prevent it from escaping, so I can pick it up in my hands, separate a certain amount of honey or pitch from the rest of the pot, and thereby create an individual object by means of continuous creation; but, at the same time, the softness of this substance, mashed in my hands, gives the impression of constantly destroying .  The image we have here is indeed a destruction-creation.  The viscous is docile .  Only, just at the moment when I believe I possess it, by means of a curious reversal I am possessed by it .  This is where its essential characteristic makes its appearance: its softness acts like suction.  If an object that I hold in my hand is solid, I can put it down whenever I please; for me, its inertia symbolizes all my power; I am its foundation, but it does not found me; it is the for-itself that is gathering up the in-itself and, without compromising itself, raising it to the dignity of in-itself, while still remaining an assimilative and creative power; the for-itself absorbs the in-itself.  In other words, within the synthetic, “In-itself-For-itself” being, possession affirms the for-itself’s primacy.  But now the viscous reverses the terms: suddenly the for-itself is compromised .  I separate my hands, and I want to let go of the viscous, but it sticks to me, drinking me up and sucking me in; its mode of being is neither the reassuring inertia of a solid nor a dynamism, like the dynamism that drives water as it rushes away.  It is a soft, drooling, and feminine activity, sucking me in; it lives obscurely under my fingers and makes me feel almost dizzy; it draws me into it, as the foot of a cliff might draw me toward it.  The viscous has a tactile fascination.  I am no longer in control of halting the process of appropriation.  It continues.  In one way, it is like the supreme docility of something possessed, a canine loyalty that is offered even when we no longer want it and, in another way, it is, beneath that docility, an appropriation of the possessor by the possessed.  We can see the symbol that is abruptly disclosed here: some forms of possession are malignant; it is possible for the in-itself to absorb the for-itself, i.e., for a being that is the opposite of the “In-itself-For-itself” to be constituted, in which the in-itself would draw the for-itself into its contingency, its indifferent externality, its unfounded existence.  At that moment I suddenly grasp the trap of the viscous: it is a fluidity that holds me back and compromises me; I cannot glide across the viscous, as all its suction pads hold me back, and it cannot glide over me; it clings to me, like a leech.  However, my gliding is not simply denied , as it is denied by a solid, but degraded .  The viscous seems to invite me, and to lend itself to gliding (for a viscous expanse at rest is not markedly distinct from an expanse of very dense liquid); only it is a trap; my gliding is sucked in by the slippery substance, and leaves its trace on me.  The viscous resembles a liquid seen in a nightmare, in which all its properties become animated by a kind of life and turn against me.  The viscous is the in-itself’s revenge: a sickly-sweet and feminine revenge, which might be symbolized on another level by the quality of the sugary .  That is why the sugary in the form of a tasted sweetness —an indelible sweetness that remains indelibly in one’s mouth and survives the act of swallowing—perfectly complements the essence of the viscous.  A sugary viscosity is the ideal of the viscous; it symbolizes the for-itself’s sugary death (the wasp that sinks into the jam and drowns there).  But at the same time the viscous is me , just by virtue of my having started to appropriate the viscous substance.  This suction by the viscous that I can feel on my hands is the beginning of a continuity between the viscous substance and myself.  These long and soft columns of substance, which fall away from me and reach right down to the viscous expanse (when, for example, having plunged my hand into it, I pull it back), symbolize something akin to a flowing of myself into the viscous.  And the hysteresis that I notice, in the fusion of the base of these columns with the expanse, symbolizes something like my being’s resistance to its absorption within the in-itself.  If I sink down into some water, if I dive in, if I allow myself to go with its flow, I am not at all disturbed, because I do not have the slightest fear of becoming diluted within it: I remain a solid within its fluidity.  If I sink down into something viscous, I feel that I will lose myself in it, i.e., become diluted into the viscous, precisely because the viscous is in the process of becoming solid.  From this point of view, the pasty presents the same aspect, but it does not fascinate or compromise us, because it is inert.  In the very act of apprehending the viscous, a substance that is sticky, compromising, and lacks equilibrium, there is an element of anxiety about metamorphosis .  To touch the viscous is to risk becoming diluted into viscosity.  Now this dilution is, taken alone, already terrifying, because it is the for-itself’s absorption by the in-itself, like ink by blotting paper.  But it is additionally terrifying, if one is to be metamorphosed into a thing, that this precise metamorphosis should be into something viscous.  If I could even conceive of a liquefaction of myself, i.e., of my being’s transformation into water, I would not be unduly affected by it, because water is the symbol of consciousness: its movement, its fluidity, that solidarity without solidarity with its being, its perpetual flight, etc., everything about it reminds me of the for-itself and, indeed, the first psychologists to point out the duration that is a characteristic of consciousness (James, Bergson) frequently compared it to a river.  A river is the best way to conjure up an image of the constant interpenetration of the parts of a whole and their continual capacity to dissociate, and become available.  But the viscous presents a horrible image: for any consciousness it is horrible in itself to become viscous .  That is because the being of something viscous is a soft adherence and, through the suction action of all of its parts, each part is in cunning solidarity and complicity with all the others; each of these parts makes a vague and soft attempt to individuate itself, an attempt that is followed by the individual’s collapse back, its emptied flattening, as it is sucked from all sides by the substance.  A consciousness that became viscous would therefore be transformed by the thickening-out of its ideas.  From the moment we arise in the world, such a consciousness haunts us, wanting to launch itself into the future, toward a project of itself and finding itself, in the very moment at which it is aware of achieving this, cunningly and invisibly held back by the suction of the past and forced to witness its slow dilution into that past from which it is running, and the invasion of its project by a thousand parasites, until at last it loses itself completely.  The “stolen thoughts” involved in psychotic delusions of control provide us with the best image of this horrible condition.  52 But how is this fear expressed, at the ontological level, other than precisely through the for-itself’s flight in the face of facticity’s in-itself, i.e., precisely through its temporalization? The horror of the viscous is a horror of time’s becoming viscous, of facticity’s continual and imperceptible progression, and that it might suck up the for-itself which “exists” it.  It is the fear neither of death, nor of the pure in-itself, nor of nothingness but of a particular type of being, which has no more existence than the in-itself-for-itself and which the viscous merely represents .  This ideal being, which I condemn with all my strength, haunts me in the way that value haunts me in my being.  In it, the unfounded in-itself has priority over the for-itself; we may refer to this ideal being as an anti-value .  In this way, in the project to appropriate the viscous, viscosity suddenly shows itself as the symbol of an anti-value, which is to say of a type of being that is not actual but threatened, which will continually haunt consciousness as the constant danger it flees, and in so doing suddenly transforms the project of appropriation into a project of flight.  Something has appeared which is not the result of any earlier experience but only of the preontological understanding of the in-itself and the for-itself and which is properly the meaning of the viscous.  In one way, it is an experience, since viscosity is an intuitive discovery; and, in another way, it is like the invention of an adventure of being.  On this basis a specific new danger appears for the for-itself, a threatening mode of being that is to be avoided, a concrete category which it will reencounter everywhere.  The viscous does not symbolize any psychological attitude a priori : it manifests a certain relation of being with itself, and this relation is from the outset made psychological because I came across it in the first stages of an appropriation and because the viscosity sent back to me my image.  Thus, from my first contact with the viscous, I am enriched by an ontological scheme that may be used, beyond the distinction between the psychological and the nonpsychological, to interpret the meaning of being of all existents of a certain category, a category which, moreover, arises as an empty frame before the experience of the various types of the viscous.  I have cast it into the world through my original project in relation to the viscous; it is an anti-value and, at the same time, an objective structure of the world, defining a sector within which viscous objects come to be organized.  Henceforth, whenever an object manifests this relation of being to me—whether it is a matter of a handshake, a smile, or a thought—it will by definition be apprehended as viscous; in other words, it will appear to me, beyond its phenomenal texture, to constitute—along with every kind of pitch, glue, honey, etc.—the large ontological sector of viscosity.  And reciprocally, to the extent that the this which I want to appropriate represents the entire world, the viscous, from my first intuitive contact with it, appears to me to be replete with obscure meanings and references beyond itself.  The viscous discloses itself as being “much more than the viscous”; from the moment it appears it transcends every distinction between the psychological and the physical, between the brute existent and the worldly meanings; it is a possible meaning of being.  The first experience that a child may have of the viscous therefore enriches him psychologically and morally: he will not need to reach adulthood in order to discover the kind of agglutinative lowness which we call, figuratively, “viscous”: it is there, alongside it, in the very viscosity of the honey or the glue.  What we say in relation to the viscous holds for all the objects which surround the child: the mere revelation of their matter stretches his horizon out to the furthest limits of being and confers on him, at the same time, a collection of keys for deciphering the being of all human facts.  That does not mean that he knows from the start the “ugly” aspects of life, its “characteristics” or, on the contrary, the “beauties” of existence.  Only he has in his possession all the meanings of being , of which ugliness and beauty, modes of behavior, psychological traits, sexual relations, etc., will never be more than particular exemplars.  The sticky, the pasty, the vaporous, etc., the holes in sand and soil, caves, the light, the dark, etc., reveal pre-psychological and pre-sexual modes of being to him, which he will spend his life, thereafter, in explicating.  No “innocent” child exists.  In particular, we will acknowledge, with the Freudians, the innumerable relations to sexuality maintained by certain matters and certain forms in the child’s surroundings.  But by that we do not mean that an already constituted sexual instinct has charged them with a sexual meaning.  It seems to us, on the contrary, that these matters and forms are grasped in their own right and that they reveal to the child modes of being and relations to the for-itself’s being that will elucidate and mold his sexuality.  To give just one example, many psychoanalysts have been struck by the attraction by which the child is drawn to all kinds of holes (holes in sand, in soil, grottoes, caves, crevices), and they have explained this attraction either by the anal character of infantile sexuality, or by a prenatal shock, or even by a premonition of the sexual act in its strict sense.  We will not accept any of these explanations: the one about “birth trauma” is extremely fanciful.  The one that equates the hole to the female sexual organ presupposes an experience on the part of the child that he cannot have or a premonition that cannot be justified.  As for the child’s “anal” sexuality, we do not wish to deny it, but for it to illuminate the holes which he encounters in the field of perception, and to give them a symbolic charge, the child would need to apprehend his anus as a hole; better still, his apprehension of the essence of the hole, or the orifice, would have to correspond to the sensation he has of his anus.  But we have shown the subjective character of the “body-for-me” enough to make it understood that it is impossible for the child to grasp any part of his body as an objective structure of the universe.  It is for the Other that the anus appears as an orifice.  It cannot be lived that way; it could not be disclosed in that aspect even by the intimate care which the mother gives to the child, since the anus, which is an erogenous zone and susceptible to pain, does not have any tactile nerve endings.  It is on the contrary through the Other—through the words the mother uses to refer to the child’s body—that he learns that his anus is a hole .  For him, therefore, the objective nature of the hole perceived in the world is what will illuminate the objective structure and the meaning of the anal zone, and will give a transcendent meaning to the erogenous sensations that he was confined hitherto only to “exist.” Now, as itself, the hole is the symbol for a mode of being that existential psychoanalysis needs to clarify.  We cannot develop this here.  However, we can see immediately that it presents itself from the outset as a nothingness “to be filled” with my own flesh: the child cannot restrain himself from putting his finger or his entire arm into a hole.  It offers me therefore an empty image of myself; to make myself exist within the world which awaits me, I need only to flow into it.  The hole’s ideal is therefore that of an excavation which can be molded carefully to my flesh, so that, if I take the trouble and narrowly adjust myself to it, I will contribute to bringing into existence the plenum of being in the world.  Thus, in plugging a hole I am in the first place making a sacrifice of my body in order that a plenitude of being should exist, which is to say I suffer the for-itself’s Passion in order to shape, to perfect, and to save the in-itself’s totality.  53 We may grasp in this, at its origin, one of the most fundamental tendencies of human-reality: the tendency to fill .  We come across this tendency in the adolescent and the adult; a good part of our lives is spent in plugging holes, in filling gaps, in bringing about and symbolically founding fullness.  The child recognizes, on the basis of his earliest experiences, that he himself is holed.  When he puts his finger in his mouth, he is trying to wall up the holes in his face; he waits for his finger to merge into his lips and palate and to plug the buccal orifice, in the way in which one uses cement to plug a crack in the wall.  He seeks the density, the uniform and spherical plenitude, of Parmenidean being and, if he sucks his finger, it is precisely in order to dilute it, to transform it into a sticky paste to close up the hole of his mouth.  Among the tendencies which underlie the act of eating, this one is certainly one of the most fundamental: the food is the “mastic” that will close up the mouth; to eat is, among other things, to plug oneself.  It is only from there that we can pass on to sexuality: the obscenity of the female sex organ is that of all gaping things; it is a call for being , as all holes are, moreover; in herself the woman is calling for a foreign flesh which, penetrating and diluting her, must transform her into a plenitude of being.  And conversely the woman feels her condition to be like an appeal, precisely because she is “holed.” That is the true origin of Adler’s complex.  Doubtless the sex organ is a mouth, and a voracious mouth which swallows the penis—which may well bring in the idea of castration: the act of love castrates the man—but that is because, before anything else, the sex organ is a hole.  What we have here therefore is a pre-sexual contribution which becomes a component of sexuality as an empirical and complex human outlook, but whose origin in no way derives from being-sexed, and has nothing in common with the fundamental sexuality whose nature we explicated in book III.  54 It remains no less true that the experience of the hole, when the child sees reality, includes an ontological premonition of sexual experience in general; it is with his flesh that the child plugs the hole and, before any sexual specification, the hole is an obscene expectation, a call for flesh.  We can appreciate how important it will be, for existential psychoanalysis, to elucidate these immediate and concrete existential categories.  On that basis we can grasp some extremely general projects of human-reality.  But the psychoanalyst’s interest lies, first and foremost, in determining the free project of the particular person, on the basis of the individual relation which connects him with these different symbols of being.  I might like to have contact with the viscous, and have a horror of holes, etc.  That does not mean that the viscous, the greasy, the hole, etc., have lost their general ontological meaning for me but, on the contrary, that because of this meaning I determine myself in such and such a way in relation to them.  If the viscous is indeed the symbol of a being in which the for-itself is drunk up by the in-itself, what does that say about me as someone who, unlike others, likes the viscous? Which fundamental project of myself shall I be referred to if I wish to explicate this love for a murky in-itself which bogs me down? Thus people’s tastes do not remain as irreducible givens; if we know the right questions to ask, they will reveal to us the person’s fundamental projects.  Even in people’s food preferences, there is a meaning.  We will see this if we fully reflect on the fact that every taste presents itself not as an absurd datum for us to excuse but as an evident value.  If I like the taste of garlic it will seem irrational to me that others can fail to like it.  To eat is, in fact, to appropriate by means of destruction and at the same time to plug oneself with a certain being.  And this being is given as a synthesis of temperature, density, and flavor in the strict sense.  In brief, this synthesis signifies a certain being and when we eat we do not confine ourselves to knowing , by means of taste, certain qualities of this being; in tasting them, we are appropriating them.  Taste is an assimilation; the tooth reveals, through its very grinding action, the density of the substance that it transforms into a bolus.  In addition, the synthetic intuition of the food is in itself an assimilative destruction.  It reveals to me the being from which I will make my flesh.  In consequence, what I accept or reject with disgust is the very being of this existent—or, alternatively, the totality of the foodstuff proposes, for being, a certain mode of being that I will accept or refuse.  This totality is organized as a figure, in which the qualities of density and temperature are fainter, and come behind the flavor proper, which expresses them.  The “sugary,” for example, expresses the viscous when we eat a spoonful of honey or molasses, in the way that an analytic function expresses a geometric curve.  In other words, all the qualities that are not in the strict sense the flavor—but which are collected together, melted, and sunk within the flavor—represent something akin to the flavor’s matter .  (This chocolate biscuit which at first resists my tooth, and then suddenly yields to it and crumbles: its resistance and then its crumbling are chocolate.) They are linked, besides, to certain temporal characteristics of the flavor, i.e., to its mode of temporalization.  Some tastes are given all at once, others are like time-delayed rockets, others disclose themselves in stages, some slowly taper off until they disappear and others vanish at just the moment when we thought we had taken hold of them.  These qualities are structured alongside the density and temperature; in addition, they express at another level the foodstuff’s visual appearance.  If I eat a pink cake, its taste is pink; the faint sugary smell and the buttercream’s smoothness are its pink.  Thus I can eat pink, just as I can see sugar.  We can appreciate that the flavor, in consequence, acquires a complex architecture and a differentiated matter; it is this structured matter—in which a particular type of being is appresented—that we may assimilate or reject with nausea, according to our original project.  It is not at all, therefore, a matter of indifference if we like oysters or clams, snails or shrimps, so long as we know how to disentangle the existential meaning of these foods.  On a more general level, no taste or inclination is irreducible.  They all represent a certain appropriative choice of being.  It is the task of existential psychoanalysis to compare and to classify them.  At this point ontology abandons us: it has enabled us simply to determine human-reality’s ultimate ends, its fundamental possibles, and the value by which it is haunted.  Each human-reality is at the same time the direct project to metamorphose its own for-itself into the in-itself-for-itself, and the project to appropriate the world as the totality of being-in-itself, in the form of a fundamental quality.  Every human-reality is a Passion, in that its project is to lose itself in order to found being and at the same time to constitute the in-itself as escaping contingency by being its own foundation, the Ens causa sui that the religions know as God.  In this way man’s Passion is the opposite of Christ’s, because man loses himself as man in order that God should be born.  But the idea of God is contradictory and we lose ourselves in vain; man is a useless Passion.  Part Two: Being-For-Itself Part Two GT107 Being-for-itself Index P pain 413 , 443 , 444–452 , 473–475 pantheistic intuitions 252–253 Pascal, Blaise 71n48 , 292n26 , 702 , 730 , 735n11 Passion 794 , 796–797 , 804 passions 579–582 , 583 , 584 , 586–587 past: anguish in the face of 70–72 , 81–84 ; bad faith 101 ; Bergsonian notion of 199–200 ; body parts 464 ; body’s instrumentality 437 , 438 , 439 ; constituting an act 573 ; death 170 , 174 , 214 , 697 , 702 ; dynamic temporality 208–211 , 212–214 ; equipmentality 282 , 283 , 284 ; freedom and facticity 646–657 , 713 , 716 , 717 ; motives 71–72 , 178 , 516 , 589–591 ; new choices 610 ; ontological description 202–207 , 208 ; original choice 627 ; phenomenological study of 163 , 164–180 , 191 , 201 ; and potentiality 273 , 274 ; reflection 224 , 225 , 226 , 227 , 236–237 , 240 , 242 ; regressive analysis 86 , 598 , 600 , 602 , 673–674 ; world-time 285–291 past perfect (pluperfect) 169 , 210–211 , 212 Paulhan, Jean 669 , 672 Peirce, Charles Sanders 92 perception: as action 432–433 ; body’s facticity 437 ; ground 603 ; and imagination 778 ; and memory 165 ; as mode of behavior 622 ; negation 41–42 , 62–64 , 256 ; not-being 205 ; Other 318 , 347–352 , 354–355 , 462–463 ; percipere , being of 8–16 ; percipi , being of 16–20 ; of quality 264 ; see also knowledge permanence: ache 449 ; being-for-itself, disclosure of 277 ; essence 285 , 287 , 298 ; possessed object 763 ; and potentiality 271–273 , 275 , 276 ; situation 716–717 ; within change 168–169 , 172 , 193–194 , 208–211 , 214 ; world-time 286 , 296 , 297 personality 160–161 , 168 , 170 , 339 , 693 , 724 , 729 Phaedo (Plato) 62 phenomenological reduction 6 , 34 , 61 , 65 , 124 , 156 , 317 , 370 , 371–372 , 424 , 592 Phenomenology of Spirit (Hegel) 46 , 110n23 , 204n40 , 223n46 , 325 , 329n11 , 331 , 332n13 phenomenon: as an abstraction 34 , 245 ; being of 5–7 ( see also being-in-itself ); immanentism 808 ; monism of 1–5 ; of the other 313–314 , 315 , 320 ; perception 8–20 ; permanence and change 209 ; transphenomenality 20–23 physical activity 747 , 748 , 752–759 ; see also fatigue physiognomy 466 Piaget, Jean 11 pinkness 796 place: absence as presence 378 , 379–380 ; distance 55–56 , 194 , 349–350 , 351 , 640 , 643 , 644 , 645 ; facticity and freedom 639–646 , 713 , 716 ; and my surroundings 657 ; practical organization of objects 431–432 ; orientation 224 , 349 , 413–414 , 425 , 427 , 434 Plato 49n22 , 62 , 417 , 799 , 800 , 809n12 play 103 , 134 , 747 , 748 , 752–759 pleasure: body-for-itself 413 , 452–453 ; consciousness of 13–14 ; consumption 770 ; possibles 13–14 , 157 , 158 ; psychoanalysis 95 , 96–97 ; psychological time 241 ; sadism 527 , 531 , 532 , 534 ; sexual desire 507 , 508 , 515 , 522 , 523–524 pluperfect (past perfect) 169 , 210–211 , 212 Poe, Edgar Allan 779 Poincaré, Henri 3 , 198–199 , 389 Politzer, Georges 713n101 possession: art 747 , 748 ; being-for-the-Other 483 , 486 , 496 ; being-in-the-world 161 , 774–776 , 781 ; destruction as 769–771 , 773–774 ; knowing as 567 , 749–752 , 772 ; making/creating 747–749 , 764–765 , 766 ; original project 606 ; play 597 , 747 , 748 , 752–759 ; possessed-possessor relationship (of being) 761–772 ; property rights 155 , 760–761 ; sadism 526–527 , 530 , 531 , 533 , 534 ; sexual desire 513–516 , 518–519 , 522 , 524–525 , 526 , 531 , 751–752 ; symbolism 750–751 , 754 , 768–769 , 771 , 772–774 , 777 ; utilization 748–749 , 758 , 760 , 768 , 769–770 ; viscosity 785–786 , 788 , 789 , 791 possibilities: afforded by an intolerant world 539 ; anguish 67–72 , 73 , 74–75 , 76 , 81–84 , 810–811 ; appropriation 764 ; being-for-itself, immediate structures of 131–132 , 136 , 150–159 , 161 , 162 , 273 , 274 , 733 ; being-with 549 ; death 697 , 701–702 , 707 , 710–711 ; equipmentality 281 , 283 , 284 , 285 ; and freedom as the foundation of essence 576 ; God 735 ; hunger 511 ; indicated by my body 411 ; love 490 ; motivations and reasons 572 , 574–575 ; negative response (to questions) 35–36 , 59 ; and the original project 601–616 ; Other, objectification of 390 , 391–392 , 401–402 ; Other’s look 352–353 , 355 , 356 , 360–362 , 366 , 367 , 369 , 370 , 377 , 378 , 381 ; and potentiality 270 , 271 , 272 , 273 , 274–275 , 276 ; sexual desire 512 , 513 , 514 , 521 ; and suffering 145 ; temporality 175 , 189 , 190 , 191–192 , 211–212 , 227 , 233 , 234 , 236 ; unrealizables 685–689 , 710–711 , 716–717 ; world (universal) future 298 , 299–300 possibilization 191–192 , 211–212 , 613 potentialities: and actuality 3 , 153 , 185 , 233 ; attitudes toward the Other 520 , 525 , 533 ; being-with 552 , 554 , 557–558 ; and coefficient of adversity 657 ; and freedom 588 , 657 , 662 , 675 ; and the Other 308 , 309 , 333 , 355 , 356 , 360 , 361 , 434 ; pleasure 13 ; qualities, existential psychoanalysis of 778 , 780 , 781 ; reflection 222 ; states 233 , 234 ; transcendence 270–277 , 279 , 284 ; world-time 298 potlatch 770 Pozzo di Borgo, Carlo Andrea 234 prereflective cogito : bad faith 86 , 90 , 113 , 116 ; being-for-itself, immediate structures of 121 , 122–123 , 125–128 , 133 , 134 , 143n25 , 160 , 161 ; knowledge 224 ; nihilating structure 73 ; subjectivity of death 694 ; transphenomenal phenomena 21–23 ; see also being-in-itself ; non-thetic consciousness presence: presence of the Other 378–379 , 380–382 , 456–457 , 552 ; see also ground ; self-presence present: action, phenomenology of 438–439 ; dynamic temporality 208 , 210 , 211 ; equipmentality 282 , 283 , 284 ; Other’s movement 461 , 463 ; potentiality 270 , 271 , 273 ; reflection 225 , 226 , 227 , 236–237 , 240 , 242 ; situation 646 , 647 , 648 , 650 , 652 , 654 ; static temporality 193 , 195 , 200 , 201 , 203 , 207 , 208 ; and three temporal dimensions, phenomenology of 163 , 164–172 , 173 , 175 , 176 , 177 , 178–191 , 201 , 208 ; world-time 291–298 , 365 pride 357 , 360 , 365 , 366 , 391 , 394–395 , 440 , 499 , 686 , 687 prisoners 87 , 631 , 650 , 692 , 717–718 probability: false objects 616 ; Other 344 , 346 , 347–352 , 354 , 362 , 375–376 , 377 , 381 , 382 , 408 ; and potentiality 276 ; temporality 225 , 235–236 ; world future 298–299 , 300 prohibition 51 , 71 , 73 , 78–79 , 87 , 349 , 369 , 634 , 665 , 681–682 Proust, Marcel 3 , 168 , 194 , 235 , 240–242 , 465 , 486 , 579 , 730 psyche 179 , 232–242 , 243 , 279 , 462 , 472 , 541 , 580 , 581 , 740 psychiatry 92 , 93 , 96 , 495 , 726 psychoanalysis 236–237 , 537 ; acts, structure of 599–600 ; and bad faith 91–97 ; inferiority complex 601 , 618–620 ; perception 603 ; repression 94–95 , 619 ; selection 605 ; ultimate possibility 602 ; unconscious 604 ; see also existential psychoanalysis The Psychoanalysis of Fire (Bachelard) 778 psychological determinism: and anguish 69 , 72 , 80–81 ; consolation 539 ; future as a missing dimension 600 , 602 ; and love 486 ; motivation for action 573–574 , 577–578 , 593 ; passions and will 579–581 and universal determinism 62–64 psychological temporality 64 , 217 , 227–229 , 233–242 , 243 , 449 , 464 psychology: affectivity of motives 589–590 ; body as a psychological object 463 ; knowledge of the past 206–207 , 589–590 ; senses 455 ; sexual desire 505–507 ; states 139 , 227 , 228 , 232 , 233 , 235 , 240 , 242 , 586 , 623 ; “we”-subject 558–560 , 563 ; see also psychological determinism psychotic delusions 495 , 791 pure (objective knowledge) 415–416 , 417–421 pure reflection 223–227 , 228 , 229 , 232 , 234 Q qualities: affective 443–444 ; as being 6–7 , 263 , 781–782 ; being possessed (mine) 748 , 750 , 760 , 761 , 763 , 764 , 765–766 , 772 ; determination as negation 263–267 , 268 ; of food 795–796 ; of holes 793–795 ; movement 295–296 ; my fellow man 665 , 681 , 685 ; objectification of me 373–375 ; ontological basis for existential psychoanalysis 779–780 , 781 ; psychological symbolism 784–785 ; revelation of being 777–797 ; sensory apprehension 429 , 778 ; smoking 773 ; snow 754–755 , 756–757 ; temporality 227 , 228 , 232 , 233 , 235 , 272 ; viscosity 778 , 783–792 quantity 12 , 268–270 , 383 questioning: human freedom as prerequisite for 72 ; negation and nihilation 35–36 , 59–60 , 62 ; non-being 36–37 ; non-judicative behavior 38–39 ; and nothingness 44 , 59 ; see also knowledge R race 440 , 459 , 629 , 664 , 681 , 682 , 684 , 685 , 686 , 687 , 689 reading examples 444–452 , 465–466 realism: appropriation 763 ; death 690 , 706 , 707 ; Other’s existence 309–311 , 312 , 317 , 318 , 319 , 320 , 330 , 337–338 , 343 ; phenomenon-consciousness relationship 25 , 29 , 244 , 623 ; temporality 183 , 218 , 283 , 302 redness 34 , 146 , 777 reflection: anguish 67 , 69 , 79 , 80 ; being-for-the-Other 403–407 , 807 ; desire 542 ; equipmentality 281 , 771 ; in existential psychoanalysis 740–741 ; God as project 754 ; historicity 220–221 , 223–227 , 228 ; impure 223 , 229 , 230–232 , 234 , 235 , 242 ; motivation 591–592 ; my existence as known by the Other 472 ; pain 445 , 448–450 , 451 , 473 , 527 ; possibility of error and voluntary self-reform 616–622 ; psychological temporality 227–229 , 233–242 , 243 ; pure 223–227 , 228 , 229 , 232 , 234 ; shame 307–308 ; structure of 217 , 218–223 ; “we”-object 551 ; see also prereflective cogito ; reflection-reflecting dyad reflection-reflecting dyad: foundation of the for-itself 247 , 278 , 386 , 403–404 ; Hegel’s master-slave relation 329 ; knowledge 247 , 248–249 ; lack 149 , 278 , 284 ; metaphysical observations 800 , 802 , 804 , 806 ; Other’s existence 329 , 404 , 806 ; self-presence 125–126 , 128–129 , 160 , 329 , 578 ; temporality 179 , 180 , 183 , 187 , 203 , 205 , 207 , 216 , 219 regressive analysis 86 , 598 , 600 , 602 , 673–674 “relativity of sensations” 420–421 remanence 172 remorse 532 , 720 , 722 repentance 174 repression 94–95 , 619 resentment 88 , 101 , 108 , 174–175 , 233 resistances: aspect of appropriation 755 , 759 ; desire 511 , 512 ; freedom 595 , 631 , 637 , 638 , 645 , 660 , 681–683 ; and my facticity 134 ; opportunity for 539 ; Other’s body 455 ; psychoanalysis 93–94 , 620 , 744 ; qualities revealing being 788 , 796 ; sadism 531 , 532 ; structures of equipment 435–436 , 440 “Respect for the Other’s freedom” 539 responsibility 550 , 607 , 704 , 718–723 revolutionaries 564 , 571 , 573 , 574–575 , 645 , 689 , 704 , 752 rhythm, collective 339–340 , 559 Rilke, Rainer Maria 691n76 Rimbaud, Arthur 779 , 780 Romains, Jules 545 , 719 Rougemont, Denis de 567 , 673n68 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 252 , 538 S Sacher-Masoch, Leopold von 501 sacredness 495 , 761 sadism 500 , 526–535 , 537 sadness 105 , 212–213 , 227 , 228 Saint Anselm 7 Sarment, Jean 99 satanism 393–394 sati 762 Scheler, Max 88 , 146 , 442 , 444 , 509 , 779n44 Schiller, Friedrich 750 Schlumberger, Jean 650 Schopenhauer, Arthur 317 , 319 science 280 , 288 , 414–415 , 417–420 , 421 , 749–752 secondary possibles 606 , 614–616 second attitude toward the Other (objectification) 481 , 482 , 501–543 ; freedom 501–502 , 503 , 504–505 ; hatred 536 , 540–543 ; indifference 503–505 , 539 ; sadism 500 , 526–535 , 537 ; sexual desire 505–526 seduction 492–493 , 494 , 496 self see ipseity (selfhood) self-coincidence 150 , 154 , 156 , 157 self-negation see bad faith self-presence 121–129 , 143 , 156–157 , 160 , 226 , 277–278 , 329 , 578 , 579 , 594 , 606 , 802 , 803 sensation, of effort 435 sensory knowledge: and existential psychoanalysis 778 , 783 ; food 795 ; of my own body 410–411 , 425 , 440–441 , 455 , 469–470 , 475–476 , 477–478 , 793 ; scientific investigation 417–420 , 421 ; senses and being-in-the-world 424–430 , 436–437 , 477 ; subjectivity 420 , 421–424 , 426 , 428 ; viscosity 783 , 791 sentences 669–674 , 680 seriousness 79 , 752–753 , 809–810 sexual desire 505–526 ; appropriation of the Other’s body 513–516 , 518–519 , 522 , 524–525 , 526 , 531 , 751–752 ; bad faith 96 , 98 ; existential psychoanalysis 730 , 742–743 ; failure of 502 , 523–526 , 532 , 533–534 , 537 ; motive and meaning 516–522 ; as ontological apprehension of sexuality 507–508 ; as a psycho-physiological reaction 505–507 , 508–509 , 511 , 523 , 535–536 ; sadism 500 , 526–535 , 537 ; same sex 537 ; what is desired 508–510 ; who desires 510–513 sexual differentiation 506 sexuality: bad faith 96 , 97–98 ; determination of 537 ; freedom 623 ; Oedipus complex 92 , 600 ; for-itself’s project 741 , 742 sexual organs 505–507 , 508 , 511 , 523 , 534 , 793–795 sexual symbolism and imagery: acquisition 770n36 ; Bachelard’s psychoanalysis 780 , 781 ; child development 792–793 ; curiosity 750 ; existential psychoanalysis 780 , 781 ; generosity 771 ; holes 793–795 ; knowledge 752 ; Sartre’s language 741n14 , 789 ; sight 750 ; smoothness 751 ; viscosity 787–788 shame: affective images 443 ; choice of 617–618 , 619 ; love 499 ; masochism 499–500 ; Other’s look 307–309 , 357–366 , 367 , 368 , 375–376 , 377 , 392–394 ; “we”-object 546–547 , 551 , 554 ; see also humiliation sight 287 , 419–420 , 424–425 , 428–429 , 445 , 447 , 750 , 754 ; see also eyes simultaneity 314 , 364–365 , 676 sincerity 101 , 106–108 , 109 , 110–112 situation: being-with 90 , 549–550 , 551–556 ; body-for-the-Other 459–461 , 464 , 468 , 479 ; body’s contingency 417 ; concreteness 714–715 , 775 ; as a constraint on freedom 715–716 ; the corpse 464 ; emotional response 584 ; existential psychoanalysis 735 , 739 ; freedom and facticity 628 , 629–639 , 713 ; grace 527 ; immediacy 78 ; in-the-midst of others 711–712 ; and meanings 664–675 ; and morality 811 ; my death 689–711 ; my past 646–657 , 713 , 716 , 717 ; my place 639–646 , 713 , 716 ; my surroundings 657–663 , 713 , 716 , 717 , 743 ; new choices 717–718 ; objectivity 712–713 ; obscenity 529 ; Oedipus Complex 600 ; Other as a center of reference 664 , 676–689 , 713 ; Other forced to be free 538 ; other-object 479 , 677 , 680 , 684 ; permanence 716–717 ; sexual desire 509–510 , 520–521 ; slaves 713–714 ; under the Other’s look 360 , 365 ; see also place skiing 667–668 , 675 , 755–759 slavery: being-for-the-Other 327 , 328 , 330 , 331 , 332 , 365–366 , 369 , 483 , 490 , 759 ; collective shame 546–547 ; freedom 713–714 ; generosity 771 ; hatred 542 ; negation 87 ; sadism 526 , 531 , 532 , 534 , 535 smell 6 , 41 , 265 , 476 , 598 , 773 , 774 , 796 smoking 75 , 78 , 186 , 569–570 , 749 , 773–774 snow 754–759 , 778 , 779 socialism 761 soldiers 66–67 , 103 , 375 , 400 , 559 , 643 , 654–655 solipsism 309–321 , 322 , 324 , 325 , 344 , 370 Sollier, Paul 475 Sophist (Plato) 799 Sophocles 174 , 697 , 702 soul 33 , 56 , 98 , 134 , 237 , 309–310 , 412 , 417 , 579 , 702 spatialization 254–255 , 260–261 , 277 , 294–295 , 364 , 413–414 , 452 , 461 , 640 species 562 , 597 , 666–667 , 675 , 676 , 715 , 729 spectatorship 544–545 , 560 speech 362 , 667 , 668–675 , 680 Spinoza, Baruch: freedom 682 ; idea ideae 10 , 11 , 125 , 218 ; joy 227 ; “nature natured” 753n25 ; “ Omnis determinatio est negatio ” 48 , 50 , 262 , 572 ; Other’s existence 312 , 389 ; possibility 151 , 152 ; sphere 806 ; substance 19n28 , 34 , 139 , 312 , 568 , 729 , 731 spirit 53 , 62 , 98 , 167 , 310 , 321 , 407–408 , 573 , 807 spirit of seriousness 79 , 752–753 , 809–810 Spokenbroke (Morgan) 690n75 spontaneity 215–216 , 239–240 , 580–581 , 591 , 619 sport 747 , 748 , 752–759 stammering 616 , 619 , 620 , 621 static temporality: multiplicity-based theories 194–198 ; succession 192 , 193–194 ; unification-based theories 198–200 ; unity and multiplicity 195 , 200–208 stealing 92 , 761 Steinbeck, John 706 Stekel, Wilhelm 96 Stendhal 111 , 730 , 773 Stoics 38 , 58 , 61 , 239 , 490 , 510 , 562 , 568 , 579–580 , 615 , 632 , 635 stomachache 473–475 “stroboscopic illusion” 449 subjectivity: apprehension of absence 63 ; being-in-situation 693 , 694 , 699 , 707 , 708 , 711 , 712 , 715 ; creation 766 ; desire 510 ; existential psychoanalysis 779–780 ; indifference toward the Other 503–505 ; interrogation of being-in-the-world 35 ; language 493–494 ; love 49 , 492 , 496 , 498 , 499 ; masochism 499 , 500 , 501 ; motives 73 , 586 , 589 , 590 ; my consciousness’s maintenance of being 106 ; non-being as 38 ; of the Other 366 , 369–370 , 376 , 684 ; passions 582 , 583 ; and play 753 ; possession 764 , 767 , 768 ; possibles 151–152 , 155 , 624 ; qualities 263 , 265 , 781 ; and the radical negation of the for-itself 257 , 262 , 263 ; reaction to the Other’s look 358–366 ; scientific investigation 414 , 420 ; sensory knowledge 420 , 421–424 , 426 , 428 ; transphenomenal phenomenon 21–23 ; “we”-subject 544 , 546 , 548 , 553 , 555 , 557–563 , 564 ; see also other-object sublation 47 , 125n10 , 335 substance theory: Descartes 121 , 135 , 178 , 748 ; definition of man 723 ; ethics 568 ; and facticity 135 ; and the for-itself’s transcendence 162 ; God 321 , 766 ; primacy of existence 16 ; solipsism 317–318 , 322 ; Spinoza 19n28 , 729 , 731 suffering 144–146 , 179 suicide 626 , 701 surroundings, mine (situation) 657–663 , 713 , 716 , 717 , 743 sweetness 263 , 777 , 789 , 796 symbolism: ache 474 ; existential psychoanalysis 740 , 782–793 ; human behavior 738 ; possession 750–751 , 754 , 768–769 , 771 , 772–774 , 777 ; psychoanalysis 736 , 738 , 739 , 743 ; spirit of seriousness 810 ; viscosity 778 , 783–792 , 795 ; see also sexual symbolism and imagery T taboos 78 tasks 280 , 282 , 356 , 471 , 609 , 618 , 696 , 809 , 810 taste 263 , 777 , 789 , 795–796 techniques 666–667 , 668 , 672 , 674–675 , 677–680 , 689 , 720 ; see also speech temperament 243 , 466 , 622 , 716 , 724 , 727 temporality 162 ; of an ache 449 ; anguish 67–70 , 74–75 , 80 , 81–84 , 191 ; bad faith 101 ; before the for-itself 203–204 , 803 ; body’s instrumentality 437 , 438–439 ; condition of waiting 698 ; dynamic 193 , 208–216 ; equipmentality 278 , 282–285 ; flavor 796 ; freedom 191 , 207 , 572 , 573 , 575 , 576 , 609–611 ; historicity 220–221 , 223–227 , 228 ; my past (freedom and facticity) 646–657 ; nihilation 62–64 , 65 , 73 , 101 , 176 , 189 , 201–207 , 208 , 212 , 213 , 216 , 235 ; and original choice 609 , 627 ; Other, problem of 314 ; pain 446 , 448–449 ; phenomenology of future 184–192 , 201 ; phenomenology of past 164–180 , 191 ; phenomenology of present 180–184 , 201 , 208 ; potentialities 185 , 270–277 ; psychological 64 , 217 , 227–229 , 233–242 , 243 , 449 , 464 ; simultaneity 314 , 364–365 , 676 ; and space 260–261 ; static 192–208 ; symbolism of viscosity 791 ; world-time 285–300 ; see also instants ; permanence tendencies: bad faith 107 ; existential psychoanalysis 724 , 728 , 729–730 , 731 , 732 , 733–734 , 794 ; and possibles 152 , 154 ; psychology 600 , 622 , 623 theft 92 , 761 them-object 364 , 383 , 548 , 551 , 555 them-subjects 547 , 557 third ontological dimension of the body (my existence as a body known by the Other) 468–478 ; alienation 470–471 , 472 , 473 , 474 , 475 ; contingency 469 , 476 , 477 , 478 ; equipmentality 469–470 , 471 , 475–476 , 477 ; facticity 468–469 , 472 , 475 , 477 ; objectification of me 468 , 469 , 472 , 475 ; stomachache 473–475 thirst 133 , 139–140 , 157 , 161 , 284 time see temporality tolerance 539 “The Tomb of Edgar Poe” (Mallarmé) 99 , 174 torture 531–532 , 534 , 681 , 681–682 , 719 touch 410–411 , 419 , 420 , 768 ; see also caress transphenomenality 7 , 9 , 17 , 20–21 , 23 , 29 , 41 The Trial (Kafka) 363 , 654 U ultimate possibility 602–604 , 607 , 615 , 689 , 693 , 719 Ulysses (Joyce) 598 unanimism 545 unconscious: bad faith 85 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 619 , 620 ; as consciousness’s source 15 ; desire 537 ; existential psychoanalysis 732 , 740 , 741 , 744 ; freedom and action 604 , 619 , 620 ; pain 448 , 450 ; possibility 136 ; temporality 166 , 188 , 236–237 ; words 669 undifferentiated transcendence 558 , 559–560 , 561 , 562–563 universal determinism 59 , 62 , 67 , 213 , 532 universal time: defined 285 ; future 298–300 , 463 ; Hegel’s theory of the Other 333 ; Other’s look 365 ; past 285–291 ; present 291–298 , 365 ; and the three temporal ecstases 205 , 208 unjustifiability 608 , 627 unrealizables 685–689 , 710–711 , 716–717 V Valéry, Paul 104 , 111 , 190n29 , 518n17 value: being of 136–149 , 151 , 231 , 273 ; and choice 637–638 , 651 , 719 ; and death 700 ; freedom and anguish 77–79 , 810–811 ; and the for-itself’s original project 590 , 592 , 631 , 733 , 809 ; as in-itself-for-itself 273 , 592 , 735 , 746 , 747 ; love 497 ; motivating action 572 , 574–575 , 591 ; my past 650–651 ; possession 764 , 774 ; sincerity 102 ; temporality 179–180 , 207 vanity 394–395 vertigo 66 , 67 , 69 , 70 , 500 , 513 veto see prohibition vice 501 viscosity 778 , 783–792 , 795 vulgarity 308–309 W Wahl, Jean 538 war 651–652 , 719–720 ; see also soldiers water: Bachelard 777 , 781 ; drinking and thirst 139 , 159 , 285 , 512 ; movement 172 , 464 , 751 , 786 ; quality 263 , 777 ; rain 153 ; states of 293 , 755 , 756 ; temperature 420 ; troubled 510–511 ; viscosity 787 , 788–789 , 790 Water and Dreams (Bachelard) 777 Watson, John B.  317 “we”-object 546–557 , 563 , 564 “Wesen ist was gewesen ist” 74 , 180 , 577 , 647 “we”-subject 544 , 546 , 548 , 553 , 555 , 557–563 , 564 wickedness 373 , 374–375 will: motives and action 81 , 528n23 , 569 , 579–593 , 618 , 619 , 622 , 640 ; to power 486 , 531 , 617 , 741–742 , 745 , 780 , 781 words 669 , 670–674 working class see laboring community world-time: defined 285 ; future 298–300 , 463 ; and the Other 334 , 365 , 370 ; past 285–291 ; present 291–298 , 365 World War I 651–652 World War II 652 Y yellowness 263 , 428 , 777 , 781 , 782 Z Zeno’s argument 293–294 Translator’s Acknowledgments T RANSLATOR’S A CKNOWLEDGMENTS Sarah Richmond My thanks are due in the first instance to Tony Bruce at Routledge, who invited me to do this translation.  He and Adam Johnson (also at Routledge) have been consistently encouraging and helpful.  Their tactful inquiries about my progress on the project have enabled me to keep deadlines and promises in mind without becoming frozen by panic.  I am grateful to Luc Foisneau and Étienne Balibar, who have generously shared with me their expertise in French philosophy and their linguistic intuitions, and to Michèle Le Dœuff for helpful discussion of le visqueux .  In the UK, I thank Mary Margaret McCabe for advice about terminology and sources for Aristotle and Plato, and Sebastian Gardner for the amazing helpline he has provided for numerous questions about Kant and post-Kantian German philosophy.  Sebastian’s solidarity, his sense of humor, and our lunches in the student caff have meant a lot to me.  Armand D’Angour has answered my emails about ancient Greek and Latin words within seconds, providing translations, transliterations and Greek inscriptions on demand.  Galen Strawson has been a valued correspondent for several years: his emails have encouraged me and I have also benefited from his excellent knowledge of French as well as his sense of English style.  From Australia, Andrew Inkpin has sent many illuminating and informative messages about Heidegger, thereby saving me labor I would not have enjoyed.  George di Giovanni has generously lent me his expertise as a Hegel translator and scholar, and helped me to locate several passages in Hegel.  The text has also benefited from my correspondence with another experienced translator, Andrew Brown, with whom I have had several enjoyable face-to-face consultations in various Cambridge locations.  Andrew put me in touch with Nick Walker, another UK-based translator, who has offered further useful thoughts.  Jean-Pierre Boulé and Ben O’Donohoe, two former colleagues at Sartre Studies International , have also helpfully commented on a number of issues.  Marcus Giaquinto has allowed me to pick his brains about mathematical terminology, while Henri Chabrol has advised about psychiatry.  Tom Stern told me all I needed to know about Nietzsche’s term Hinterwelt .  Florence Caeymaex, Danièle Tort-Maloney, Jeanne Balibar, Antoine Amalric, and Pierre Amalric have also usefully commented.  Jonathan Wolff and José Zalabardo, who have served as heads of the Philosophy Department at UCL, have been sensitive line managers.  They have been generous in awarding me research time as well as some funding for research assistance.  This funding enabled me to delegate some tasks to two excellent research assistants, Alexandre Sayegh and Olivia Fairweather, whose help I also gratefully acknowledge.  Jo Wolff also commented on a draft of the Translator’s Introduction, as did Judith Barrett.  I would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers who wrote such positive reviews for my application for funding to the AHRC, and to record my disappointment in the AHRC for failing nonetheless to support it.  I regret the immense amount of time I spent struggling with the AHRC’s hideous electronic interface and with the many irrelevant questions they obliged me to answer.  I am immensely grateful to the French government–funded CNRS ( Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique ) for maintaining the superb website for “textual and lexical resources,” from which I have learned a great deal.  I am indebted to Dr.  Maria Pozzi and Dr.  Kate Kandasamy for their kind and expert support during a period of ill health.  Their thoughtful advice was indispensable in helping me to keep going through a difficult time, and deeply appreciated.  A complete first draft of the translation was sent out for review to Ron Santoni, Jonathan Webber, Kate Kirkpatrick, and Curtis Sommerlatte, and I am grateful for their helpful feedback.  Special thanks are due to Curtis Sommerlatte for his painstaking and thoughtful scrutiny, which resulted in several important improvements.  At a later stage I had the good fortune to work with Helen Moss, my copy editor; Helen’s discriminating queries and her eagle eye led to the elimination of many typos and infelicities from the text.  I would also like to thank Elizabeth Kent at Swales & Willis for all her help with production.  My parents, Theo Richmond and Lee Richmond, looked at passages of the translation as well as the Translator’s Introduction, and offered helpful criticisms.  As professional writers of English, they gave advice that has guided me in matters of register, style, and syntax.  I must also thank them for their love and their unwavering interest in my activities.  Thanks also to Judith Barrett, who has been a brilliant friend ever since we were undergraduates together.  My frequent phone calls and outings with her have significantly enhanced my well-being while I worked on this translation.  My greatest debt is to my spouse, Neil Vickers, and our two sons, Noah Vickers and Samuel Vickers.  I cannot imagine three more wonderful family members, friends, and companions.  I gratefully acknowledge their generous love, patience, and support.  This translation would not have been possible without them, and I dedicate it to them.  Chapter 2: Bad Faith Chapter 2 GT81 BAD FAITH I.  BAD FAITH AND LIES The human being is not only the being through whom negatities are disclosed in the world; it is also the being that can adopt negative attitudes in relation to itself.  In our Introduction we defined consciousness as “a being for whom in its being there is a question of its being, insofar as this being implies a being other than itself.” 1 But now we have elucidated the activity of questioning we know that our formulation could also be expressed thus: “Consciousness is a being for whom in its being there is consciousness of the nothingness of its being.” In the case of a prohibition or a veto, for example, the human being negates some future transcendence.  But this negation is not a constative.  My consciousness is not limited to merely envisaging a negatity.  It constitutes itself, in its flesh, as the nihilation of a possibility projected by some other human-reality as its possibility.  To do that, it must arise in the world as a No ; and indeed it is as a “No” that the slave initially grasps his master, and as a “No” that the prisoner who is trying to escape grasps the sentry watching over him.  There are even some men (guards, supervisors, jailers, etc.) whose social reality is uniquely that of a “No,” who will live and die without ever having been anything but a “No” on this earth.  Others, who bear this “No” within their very subjectivity, are equally constituted in their human person as a constant negation: “No” is the meaning and function of Scheler’s “man of resentment.” 2 And there are subtler attitudes—such as irony—whose description would take us further into the intimacy of consciousness.  In the case of irony, man annihilates, in the unity of a single act, what he advances; he makes you believe something in order not to be believed; he affirms in order to negate, and he negates in order to affirm; he creates a positive object whose being, however, is nothing more than its nothingness.  These attitudes of negation in relation to oneself, therefore, enable us to raise a new question: What must man be in his being for it to be possible for him to negate himself? But we ought not to take the attitude of “self-negation” as a universal.  The kinds of behavior we can classify under this heading are too diverse; we would run the risk of dealing only with their abstract form.  We should choose and examine a specific attitude, essential to human-reality, and in which, at the same time, consciousness, instead of directing its negation outward, turns it against itself.  It has seemed to us that this attitude must be bad faith .  Bad faith is often assimilated to lying.  We may indifferently say that someone is exhibiting bad faith, or that he is lying to himself.  Here we are willing to allow that bad faith consists in lying to oneself—on condition that “lying to oneself” is immediately distinguished from lying tout court .  We can agree that lying is a negative attitude.  But this negation does not bear on consciousness itself; it aims only at something transcendent.  Indeed, the essence of the lie implies that the liar is fully aware of the truth he is disguising.  We do not lie about something we do not know about; we do not lie in broadcasting a mistake of which one is oneself a victim; we do not lie when we get something wrong.  The ideal of the liar is, then, a cynic in his consciousness who affirms the truth in itself and negates it in his words, while negating this negation for himself.  Now, the targets of this doubly negative attitude are transcendent: the stated fact is transcendent, since it does not exist, and the first negation applies to a truth , i.e., to a specific transcendent type.  As to the inner negation which I carry out correlatively to my affirmation of the truth for myself, that is applied to words , i.e., to an event in the world.  In addition, the liar’s internal disposition is positive; it might be made the object of an affirmative judgment.  The liar intends to deceive, and he does not seek to hide this intention or to mask the translucency of consciousness; on the contrary, when the need arises to decide on his secondary modes of behavior, he draws on this intention—it explicitly exercises a regulative control over all his attitudes.  As to his advertised intention to tell the truth (“I do not want to deceive you,” “That is true,” “I swear to it,” etc.), it is, of course, the object of an inner negation, but at the same time the liar does not recognize it as his intention.  It is performed, rehearsed; it is the intention of the character he is playing in full sight of his interlocutor, but this character, precisely because he is not , is transcendent.  In this way, a lie does not engage the internal structure of present consciousness: all its constitutive negations apply to objects that are, accordingly, expelled from consciousness.  A lie, therefore, requires no special ontological foundation and the explanations required for the existence of negation in general remain valid, without needing to be changed, in the case of deception.  Doubtless what we have defined here is an ideal lie; it happens quite frequently, probably, that the liar is to a greater or lesser extent a victim of his lie, that he is half-persuaded by it; but these common and everyday forms of lie are also bastardized versions, which represent a halfway house between lying and bad faith.  The lie is a behavior that involves transcendence.  But this is because the lie is an ordinary phenomenon within what Heidegger calls “ Mitsein .” 3 It presupposes my existence, the existence of another , my existence for another, and another’s existence for me.  Thus we have no difficulty in conceiving that the liar must undertake the project of his lie in full lucidity, that he must have at his disposal a full understanding of his lie, and of the truth he is altering.  It is sufficient that a principle of opacity should mask his intentions to the other , sufficient that the other should be able to take the lie for the truth.  Through the lie, consciousness affirms that it exists in its nature as hidden from the Other ; it makes profitable use of the ontological duality between my own self and the Other’s self.  The situation cannot be the same for bad faith, if this latter really is—as we have said—a lie to oneself .  Of course, for the person exercising bad faith, it is still a matter of covering up an unpleasant truth or of presenting some pleasant error as the truth.  In appearance therefore, bad faith has the structure of a lie.  But what changes everything is that in bad faith it is from myself that I am concealing the truth.  Thus the duality of deceiver and deceived is not present here.  On the contrary, bad faith implies in its essence the unity of a single consciousness.  That does not mean it cannot be conditioned by “ Mitsein ” (as, moreover, all the phenomena of human-reality are), but “ Mitsein ” can solicit bad faith only by presenting itself as a situation that bad faith is able to surpass: bad faith does not come to human-reality from outside.  Bad faith is not undergone, nor does it infect us, nor is it a state .  But consciousness itself takes on its bad faith.  This requires an initial intention, and a project of bad faith; this project implies an understanding of bad faith as such, and a prereflective grasp (of) consciousness as performing its bad faith.  From this it follows, first, that the person to whom one is lying and the person who is lying are one and the same person, which means that I must know—insofar as I am the deceiver—the truth that is hidden from me insofar as I am deceived.  Better still, I must know this truth very precisely in order to hide it all the more carefully from myself—and this must not occur at two different moments within temporality (which might, at a stretch, reestablish an appearance of duality) but within the unitary structure of a single project.  How, then, can the lie survive if its conditioning duality is abolished? To this difficulty, we can add another, deriving from consciousness’s total translucency.  A person who espouses bad faith must be conscious of his bad faith, because the being of consciousness is a consciousness of being.  It seems, then, that I must be in good faith—at least insofar as I am conscious of my bad faith.  But that would annihilate the entire psychological system.  Nobody will dispute indeed that, if I deliberately and cynically attempt to lie to myself, I must completely fail in this undertaking: the lie recedes and collapses before our eyes; it is ruined, from behind , by the very consciousness of lying to myself that constitutes itself pitilessly before my project, as its very condition.  The phenomenon in this case is evanescent , existing only in and through its self-definition.  Of course, such phenomena are common and we will see in fact that “evanescence” belongs to bad faith—it is evident that bad faith oscillates constantly between good faith and cynicism.  Nevertheless, if the existence of bad faith is highly precarious—if it belongs to the category of psychological structures that can be described as “metastable”—it is no less the case that it presents us with an autonomous and durable form of it: for a very large number of people it can even be the normal aspect of life.  One can live in bad faith: this does not mean that there are no sudden awakenings of cynicism or good faith, but it implies a constant and distinctive style of life.  We seem to be in an extremely difficult position, being able neither to reject nor to understand bad faith.  In order to escape these difficulties, many people blithely resort to the unconscious.  In psychoanalytic interpretation, for example, the hypothesis of a censor will be used—conceived of as a demarcation line with its customs, passport services, currency control, etc.—to reestablish the duality between deceiver and deceived.  Here the representative of reality is instinct or, alternatively, the primary drives and complexes of drives constituted by our individual history.  An instinct is neither true nor false , because it does not exist for itself .  It simply is , exactly like this table, which is neither true nor false in itself but simply real .  As for the conscious symbolizations of instinct, they should be construed not as appearances but as real psychological facts.  A phobia, a slip of the tongue, a dream—these really exist as concrete facts of consciousness, in the same way as the liar’s words and attitudes are material ways of behaving, and really exist.  Only the subject stands before these phenomena like a deceived person in relation to the behavior of his deceiver.  He observes them in their reality, and he has to interpret them.  There is a truth to the deceiver’s behavior: if the deceived person could relate it to the deceiver’s situation and to his lying project, they would become integral parts of the truth, accounted for as lying behavior.  Similarly, there is a truth to symbolic actions: this is what the psychoanalyst uncovers when he links them to the patient’s historical situation, to the unconscious complexes they express, to the barrier of censorship.  Thus, the subject is wrong about the meaning of his behavior: he grasps it as it concretely exists but not in its truth , because he is unable to derive it from an initial situation and a psychological constitution that remain unknown to him.  The fact is that, by means of his distinction between the “id” and the “ego,” Freud split the totality of the psyche in two.  4 I am ego, but I am not id .  My position in relation to my non-conscious psyche is in no way privileged.  I am my own psychological phenomena insofar as I ascertain them in their conscious reality: for example, I am this drive to steal this or that book from this display, I am at one with it, I throw light on it, and I resolve to commit my theft in accordance with it.  But I am not these psychological facts insofar as I passively undergo them and am obliged to hypothesize about their origin and their true meaning, just as an expert conjectures about the nature and essence of some external phenomenon: this theft, for example, which I may interpret as an impulse immediately dictated by the scarcity, the interest or the price of the volume I am about to steal, is in truth a process deriving from my need for punishment, which can be related more or less directly to an Oedipus complex.  There is therefore a truth to the impulse to steal, to be reached only by means of hypotheses that are more or less probable.  The criterion of this truth will be the extent of the psychological facts it can explain: from a more pragmatic point of view, it will also be the success of the psychiatric cure it enables.  Finally, the discovery of this truth requires the assistance of the psychoanalyst, who appears as the mediator between my unconscious inclinations and my conscious life.  The Other appears as the only person able to carry out a synthesis between the unconscious thesis and the conscious antithesis.  I can only know myself through the mediation of the Other—which means that I am, in relation to my “id,” in the position of the Other .  If I have some notion of psychoanalysis, I can try, if circumstances are propitious, to psychoanalyze myself.  But this attempt can succeed only if I mistrust any kind of intuition and apply to my own case— from outside —abstract schemas and rules I have learned.  As for the results, whether they are gained by my own efforts or with the assistance of a technician, they will never enjoy the certainty conferred by intuition: they will merely have the ever-increasing probability of scientific hypotheses.  The hypothesis of the Oedipus complex, like the atomic hypothesis, is nothing but an “experimental idea”: as Peirce says, it cannot be distinguished from the set of experiments that it allows us to perform and the effects it enables us to predict.  In this way, psychoanalysis substitutes the notion of bad faith with the idea of a lie without a liar; it allows us to understand not how I am able to lie to myself but how I can be lied to , since it places me, in relation to myself, in the situation of the Other’s relation to me; it replaces the duality of deceiver and deceived—an essential condition of the lie—with the duality of “id” and “ego,” and it introduces into the depths of my subjectivity the intersubjective structure of Mitsein .  Are these explanations satisfactory? Examined more closely, psychoanalytic theory appears less simple than at first sight.  It is not quite right to say that the “id” functions like a thing in relation to the psychoanalyst’s hypothesis, because a thing is indifferent to the conjectures we make about it, and the “id,” on the contrary, is touched by them as they approach nearer to the truth.  Indeed, Freud draws attention to resistances when, at the end of the first period, the doctor approaches the truth.  These resistances are instances of objective behavior, apprehended from an external point of view: the patient shows signs of suspicion, refuses to speak, gives far-fetched accounts of his dreams, and sometimes even removes himself completely from psychoanalytic treatment.  We may nevertheless inquire which part of the patient can resist in this way.  It cannot be the “Ego,” understood as the totality of psychological facts in consciousness: the ego could hardly suspect the psychiatrist is reaching his goal, since its position in relation to the meaning of its own reactions is exactly that of the psychiatrist himself.  The most that it can do is to objectively assess the degree of probability of the hypotheses that have been advanced—as a witness of the psychoanalysis might do—and, accordingly, the extent of the subjective facts they can explain.  And if it seems to him that this probability verges on certainty, this ought not to cause him distress, since, most of the time, it is he who has committed himself, through a conscious decision, to the path of psychoanalytical therapy.  Should we say that the patient is worried by the psychoanalyst’s daily revelations, and tries to escape them, even while he acts in his own eyes as if he wishes to continue treatment? In that case we can no longer appeal to the unconscious to explain bad faith: it is out there, in full consciousness, with all its contradictions.  In any case, that is not how the psychoanalyst intends to explain these resistances: in his view they are deep and hidden, and their source is distant; they are rooted in the very thing we are trying to elucidate.  However, it is equally impossible for the resistances to stem from the complex to be revealed.  This complex, as such, will tend rather to collaborate with the psychoanalyst—since it seeks to express itself in clear consciousness, to trick the censor, and to get round it.  The subject’s refusal can be located only at the level of the censor.  It alone is able to apprehend the psychoanalyst’s questions or revelations as approaching, more or less closely, the drives in reality it is trying to repress—it alone, because it alone knows what it is repressing.  If in fact we reject the reifying language and mythology of psychoanalysis, we will see that, in order to pursue its activity discerningly, the censor must be acquainted with what it represses.  Indeed, if we abandon all those metaphors that represent repression as a clash of blind forces, we will be obliged to acknowledge that the censor must choose and, in order to choose, it has to represent itself .  How else could it happen, otherwise, that the censor allows permissible sexual drives through, and tolerates the clear expression in consciousness of needs (hunger, thirst, sleep)? And how can we explain its ability to relax its surveillance, or how the disguises of instinct can even deceive it? But it is not sufficient for the censor to discern the condemned drives; it has to apprehend them, further, as to be repressed —which implies, at the least, some representation on its part of its own activity.  In brief, how could the censor discern the drives to be repressed without being conscious of discerning them? Can we conceive of knowledge as being ignorant of itself? “To know is to know that one knows,” Alain said.  We should say, instead: All knowing is conscious of knowing.  Thus the patient’s resistances imply, at the level of the censor: a representation of the repressed as such; an understanding of the goal toward which the psychoanalyst’s questions are leading; and an act of synthetic combination, by means of which it compares the truth of the repressed complex to the psychoanalytic hypothesis directed on it.  And these various operations imply in turn that the censor is conscious (of) itself.  But what type of consciousness (of) itself can the censor have? It must be conscious (of) being conscious of the drive to be repressed, but precisely in order not to be conscious of it .  What is there left to say, other than that the censor must be in bad faith? We have gained nothing from psychoanalysis, since, in order to eliminate bad faith, it installs between the unconscious and the conscious mind an autonomous consciousness in bad faith.  The fact is that its attempt to establish a genuine duality—and even a trinity ( Id, Ego, Superego expressing itself through the censor)—amounts to no more than a verbal terminology.  The very essence of the reflexive idea of “hiding something from oneself” implies the unity of a single psyche and consequently a double activity in the heart of unity, tending on the one hand to maintain and to notice the thing to be hidden and, on the other, to push it away and to veil it; each of the two aspects of this activity complements the other, i.e., each implies the other in its being.  In separating, by means of the censor, the conscious from the unconscious, psychoanalysis has not succeeded in dissociating the two phases of the act, because the libido is a blind conatus toward conscious expression, and the conscious phenomenon is a passive and rigged result: it has merely located this twofold activity of repulsion and attraction at the level of the censor.  Moreover, in order to take account of the unity of the total phenomenon (the repression of the drive that disguises itself and “gets past” in symbolic form), we still need to establish some comprehensible connections between its different moments.  How can the repressed drive “disguise itself” if it does not encompass: (1) the consciousness of being repressed; (2) the consciousness of having been driven back because it is what it is; and (3) a project of disguise? No mechanistic theory of condensation or transference can explain these changes effected in the drive by itself, because any description of the process of disguise implies a veiled appeal to finality.  And similarly, how are we to take account of the pleasure or anguish accompanying the drive’s symbolic and conscious satisfaction, if consciousness does not include—beyond the censor’s reach—an obscure understanding of the goal to be reached, insofar as it is simultaneously desired and forbidden? Having rejected the conscious unity of the psyche, Freud is obliged to hint throughout at a magical unity linking phenomena together, across distances and through obstacles—as the primitive practice of participation brings together the person placed under a spell with the wax figure fashioned in his image.  Through participation, the unconscious “ Trieb ” 5 takes on the characteristic of being “repressed” or “damned,” which spreads through it, colors it, and magically provokes its symbolizations.  And, similarly, the conscious phenomenon is entirely colored by its symbolic meaning, even though it cannot grasp this meaning by itself and in clear consciousness.  But, in addition to its inferiority in principle, the explanation by magic does not abolish the coexistence—at the unconscious stage, the stage of censorship, and the conscious stage—of two contradictory and complementary structures, each of which reciprocally implies and destroys the other.  Bad faith has been hypostasized and “thingified,” 6 but it has not been avoided.  This is what prompted the Viennese psychiatrist Stekel to disobey psychoanalytic doctrine and to write, in La Femme Frigide : 7 “Whenever I have been able to advance far enough in my investigations, I have observed that the kernel of the psychosis was conscious.” And, moreover, the cases that he reports in his work testify to a pathological bad faith that Freudianism is unable to account for: the cases, for example, of women whose disappointment in marriage has made them frigid—which is to say that they manage to conceal from themselves the pleasure they receive from the sexual act.  Note, in the first place, that for these women it is not a matter of hiding complexes from themselves that are deeply buried in semi-physiological darkness but rather of an objectively detectable activity that they cannot fail to register at the moment they perform it: frequently, indeed, the husband reveals to Stekel that his wife has shown objective signs of pleasure, and it is these signs that the wife, when questioned, fiercely endeavors to deny.  What we have here is an activity of distraction .  Similarly we learn from the confessions elicited by Stekel that these pathologically frigid women try to distract themselves in advance from the pleasure they fear; many of them, for example, at the moment of the sexual act, divert their thoughts toward their daily occupations and go through their household accounts.  Who would want to speak here of the unconscious? However, if the frigid woman distracts her consciousness in this way from the pleasure she experiences, she does not do so cynically and in full agreement with herself: it is in order to prove to herself that she is frigid.  The phenomenon here is clearly a case of bad faith, since the effort made to dissociate from the felt pleasure implies a recognition that the pleasure is felt, and implies it precisely in order to deny it .  But we are no longer in the territory of psychoanalysis.  Thus the explanation in terms of the unconscious, by virtue, on the one hand, of severing the unity of the psyche, cannot take account of the facts that, at first sight, seem to depend on that unity.  And, on the other hand, there are an infinite number of ways of behaving in bad faith that explicitly contradict this type of explanation, because their essence implies that they can appear only within the translucency of consciousness.  We find ourselves back with the problem—still intact—that we were trying to elude.  II.  FORMS OF BAD FAITH 8 If we wish to resolve this difficulty, we ought to take a closer look at the forms of bad faith and attempt to describe them.  This description may allow us to delineate more sharply bad faith’s conditions of possibility, i.e., to answer the question from which we set out: “What must man be in his being, if he must be capable of bad faith?” Let us take, for example, this woman who has arrived at a first meeting.  She knows full well the intentions entertained, in relation to her, by the man speaking to her.  She also knows that sooner or later she will have to make a decision.  But she does not want to feel its urgency: she takes account only of the respectful and discreet aspects of her partner’s attitude.  She does not see his behavior as an attempt to make the so-called opening moves; in other words, she does not want to see the possibilities of development over time that his behavior presents; she confines his activity to what it is in the present, and has no wish to read, in the sentences he addresses to her, anything but their explicit meaning.  If he says “I admire you so much,” she strips this sentence of its sexual background: she attaches immediate meanings—envisaged as objective properties—to her interlocutor’s sayings and actions.  The man speaking to her appears to her as sincere and respectful, in the way a table is round or square, or a wall-hanging blue or gray.  And the properties she hereby attaches to the person to whom she is listening are, therefore, frozen in a thing-like permanence—which is nothing but the projection, into the flow of time, of their strict present.  The fact is that she is not aware of her wish: she keenly perceives the desire she inspires, but a crude, naked desire would humiliate and horrify her.  However, she would find no charm in an attitude of respect that was nothing but respect.  To satisfy her, she requires a feeling addressed to the whole of her person , i.e., to the whole of her freedom, and in recognition of her freedom.  But, at the same time, this feeling must be entirely one of desire, i.e., it must address her body as an object.  On this occasion, therefore, she refuses to see the desire for what it is, and does not even give it a name; she recognizes it only to the degree to which it is transcended—into admiration, esteem, respect—and entirely absorbed within the more elevated formations it produces, to the point where it no longer figures except as a sort of density and heat.  But now he takes her hand.  This action by her interlocutor threatens to change the situation by calling for an immediate decision: to leave her hand there is to consent, herself, to the flirtation; it commits her.  To withdraw it is to disrupt the vague and unstable harmony that gave the moment its charm.  The moment of decision needs to be deferred for as long as possible.  We know what happens now: the young woman leaves her hand where it is but she does not notice she has left it there.  She does not notice because it turns out by chance that she is, at that moment, pure spirit.  She takes her interlocutor right up to the most elevated regions of sentimental speculation, she talks about life, her life, and she shows herself in her most essential aspect: as a person, a consciousness.  And while she does this, the divorce of body from soul is accomplished: her hand rests there, inert between the hot hands of her partner, neither consenting nor resisting—a thing.  We will say that this woman is in bad faith.  But we can see at once that she makes use of more than one method to maintain herself in this bad faith.  She has disarmed her partner’s actions by reducing them to being only what they are, i.e., to existing in the mode of the in-itself.  But she allows herself to enjoy his desire, to the extent that she apprehends it as not being what it is, i.e., to the extent that she recognizes its transcendence.  Finally, at the same time as she keenly senses her own body’s presence—perhaps to the point of being aroused—she actualizes herself as not being her own body, and she contemplates it from a height as a passive object to which things might happen , but which can neither provoke them nor avoid them, because all its possibles lie outside it.  What unites these various aspects of bad faith? It is a certain art of forming contradictory concepts, i.e., concepts in which an idea and the negation of that idea are united.  The underlying concept generated in this way makes use of the twofold property of human beings, of being a facticity and a transcendence .  These two aspects of human-reality are, in truth—and ought to be—capable of being validly coordinated.  But bad faith does not want to coordinate them, or to resolve them by means of a synthesis.  From its point of view, it is a matter of affirming their identity, even while preserving their differences.  Facticity must be affirmed as being transcendence and transcendence as being facticity, in a way that allows us, at the moment we apprehend one of them, to find ourselves suddenly faced with the other.  The prototypical formula of bad faith can be found in certain famous phrases that are modeled—in order to produce their effect—on the spirit of bad faith.  We are familiar, for example, with this title of one of Jacques Chardonne’s works: “Love Is Far More than Love.” 9 Here we can see how love, as it is present in its facticity (“the contact of two skins,” sensuality, egoism, Proustian workings of jealousy, Adlerian struggle of the sexes, etc.), is put together with love as transcendence (Mauriac’s “river of fire,” the call of the infinite, Plato’s Eros, Lawrence’s murmuring cosmic intuition, etc.).  In this case we start out from facticity, to find ourselves suddenly—beyond the present and man’s factual being, beyond the psychological—right at the heart of metaphysics.  In contrast to this, this title of a play by Sarment: “I Am Too Big for Myself” 10 —which also displays the characteristics of bad faith—begins by throwing us straight into transcendence, in order to imprison us suddenly within the narrow limits of our de facto essence.  We meet these structures again in the famous phrase: “He has become what he was,” or in its equally famous counterpart: “Such as into Himself at last eternity changes him.” 11 Of course, these various formulas only appear to be in bad faith; they were explicitly conceived in this paradoxical form in order to make an impact, and to disconcert us mentally, with their enigma.  But this appearance is precisely what concerns us.  What matters here is that the formulas do not create any new or solidly structured notions; on the contrary, they are constructed in such a way as to remain in a state of continual disintegration, and to allow for a continual slippage from the naturalist present into transcendence, and back again.  Indeed, we can see how bad faith makes use of these judgments, all of which aim to establish that I am not what I am.  If I was only what I am , I would be able, for example, to think seriously about this reproach someone has made, to search myself scrupulously—and perhaps I would be obliged to admit its truth.  But, precisely through my transcendence, I escape from everything that I am.  I do not even have to discuss the legitimacy of the reproach, in the sense in which Suzanne says to Figaro: “To prove that I am right would be to grant that I could be wrong.” 12 I am in a place where no reproach can reach me, because what I truly am is my transcendence; I abscond and I escape, leaving my rags behind in the preacher’s hands.  Only the ambiguity necessary for bad faith stems from the claim advanced here: that I am my transcendence in the mode of being of a thing.  And it is only in this way, indeed, that I can feel myself escaping all these reproaches.  It is in this sense that our young woman purifies desire of its humiliating aspects, wanting to consider only the pure transcendence that allows her to avoid even naming it.  But conversely, “I am too big for myself”—by displaying a transcendence transformed into facticity—is the source of an infinity of excuses for our failures or our weaknesses.  In the same way, the young coquette maintains her transcendence, to the extent to which the respect and esteem demonstrated in her admirer’s behavior already belong in the order of the transcendent.  But she stops this transcendence there, and thickens it with all the facticity of the present: the respect is nothing but respect; its frozen movement of surpassing is no longer surpassed toward anything.  But if this metastable concept of “transcendence-facticity” is one of bad faith’s basic tools, it is not the only one of its type.  A similar use can be made of another duplicity in human-reality, a duplicity that we can roughly describe by saying that its being-for-itself implies a complementary being-for-the-Other.  It is always possible to make any particular behavior of mine into the target of two converging points of view: I look at it, and so does the Other.  Now, to be precise, this behavior will not present the same structure in each case.  But as we will see later, and as everyone senses, there is no difference between appearance and being between these two aspects of my being—as if I were, in relation to myself, my truth and the Other possessed only a deformed image of me.  The equal dignity in being of my being for the Other and my being for myself allows for a constantly disintegrating synthesis and a constant game of avoidance, in which the for-itself escapes to the for-the-Other, and the for-the-Other escapes to the for-itself.  We have also seen the use our young woman was able to make of our being-in-the-midst-of-the-world—i.e., of our inert presence as a passive object among other objects—in order to unburden herself suddenly of the demands of her being-in-the-world, i.e., of the being that makes the world happen, by projecting itself beyond the world toward its own possibilities.  13 Finally, let us take note of the confusional syntheses that play on the nihilating ambiguity of the three temporal ecstases, affirming at the same time that I am what I have been (the man who deliberately stops at one stage of his life and refuses to take any further changes into account) and that I am not what I have been (the man who, in the face of reproaches and resentment, completely dissociates himself from his past, insisting on his freedom and his constant recreation).  In all these concepts, whose role in the reasoning process is merely transitive, and which—like the imaginary entities in the calculations of physicists—are eliminated from the conclusion, we can find the same structure: the idea is to constitute human-reality as a being that is what it is not, and that is not what it is.  But what exactly is required in order for these concepts of disintegration to take on even an illusion of existence, so that they can appear to consciousness for an instant, even if only within a process of evanescence? In this regard, a quick analysis of the idea of sincerity—the antithesis of bad faith—will be most instructive.  In effect, sincerity presents itself as a demand and in consequence it is not a state .  Now, what is the ideal to be attained in this case? It is that man should be for himself only what he is —in brief, that he should fully and uniquely be what he is .  But isn’t that exactly our definition of the in-itself or, alternatively, the principle of identity? In positing the being of things as an ideal, must we not admit at the same time that this being does not belong to human-reality, and that the principle of identity—far from being a universal axiom—is no more than a synthetic principle, whose universality is merely regional? Thus, in order for the concepts of bad faith to be able to deceive us, even for a moment—for the candor of “the pure in heart” (Gide, Kessel) 14 to work as an ideal for human-reality—it must be the case that human-reality is not necessarily what it is, and that it can be what it is not.  What does that mean? If man is what he is, bad faith is forever impossible and candor ceases to be his ideal and becomes instead his being; but is it the case that man is what he is and, in general, how can one be what one is, when one’s way of being is to be conscious of being? If candor or sincerity is a universal value, it follows that its maxim—“One should be what one is”—is not only a regulative principle for the judgments and concepts I may use to express what I am.  It states not only an ideal for knowledge but an ideal for being : what it proposes, as the paradigm of being, is being’s absolute self-adequation.  15 So we should make ourselves be what we are.  But then what are we , if we are constantly obliged to make ourselves be what we are, if our mode of being is that of having to be what we are? Consider this café waiter.  His movements are animated and intent, a bit too precise, a bit too quick; he approaches the customers with a bit too much animation; he leans forward a bit too attentively, his voice and his eyes expressing an interest in the customer’s order that is a bit too solicitous.  Finally, here he is, on his way back, and attempting in his attitude to imitate the inflexible exactitude of some kind of automaton while carrying his tray with the recklessness characteristic of a tightrope walker, holding it in a constantly unstable and constantly disrupted equilibrium, which he constantly restores with a light movement of his arm and hand.  His behavior throughout strikes us as an act.  He concentrates on his successive movements as if they were mechanisms, each one of them governing the others; his facial expression and even his voice seem to be mechanical; he adopts the pitiless nimbleness and rapidity of things.  He is playing, amusing himself.  But what, then, is he playing at? One does not need to watch him for long to realize: he is playing at being a café waiter.  Nothing in this should surprise us: play is a type of research and investigation.  The child plays with his body to explore it, to take stock of it; the café waiter plays with his condition in order to actualize it.  This obligation is imposed in the same way on all shopkeepers: their condition is entirely ceremonial, and the public demands them to actualize it as a ceremony; there is the dance of the grocer, the tailor, the auctioneer, through which they try to persuade their customers that they are nothing more than a grocer, an auctioneer, a tailor.  A grocer who dreams is offensive to the buyer, because he is no longer completely a grocer.  Etiquette requires him to contain himself in his grocer’s function, as the soldier standing to attention makes himself a soldier-thing, who looks straight ahead of him but sees nothing, whose gaze is no longer meant for seeing, because it is not the interest of the moment but the regulations that determine the spot he must focus on (eyes “fixed at a distance of ten paces”).  We can see how many measures exist, to imprison man in what he is.  It is as if we lived in the constant fear that he might escape from it, that he might burst out and suddenly elude his condition.  But that is because, symmetrically, from the inside, the café waiter cannot immediately be a café waiter in the sense in which this inkwell is an inkwell, in which the glass is a glass.  It is not that he is unable to form reflective judgments or concepts about his condition.  He knows full well what it “means”: the obligation to get up at five o’clock, to sweep the floor of the premises before the rooms are opened, to get the coffee machine going, etc.  He knows the rights that come with it: the right to a tip, trade union rights, etc.  But all these concepts and judgments refer to something transcendent.  These are abstract possibilities, rights and duties, accorded to a “legal subject.” And it is precisely this person that I have to be and that I am not.  It is not that I don’t want to be him, or that he is someone else.  Rather, there is no common measure between his being and mine.  For others he is a “performance” and, for me, this means that I can be him only by performing him .  But, precisely, if I represent him to myself, I am not him.  I am separated from him, like an object from its subject: I am separated by nothing , but this nothing isolates me from him; I cannot be him; I can only play at being him , i.e., by imagining that I am him.  And, through that very action, I imbue him with nothingness.  Try as I might to carry out the tasks of a café waiter, I can be one only in a neutralized mode, in the way an actor is Hamlet, by mechanically making the typical gestures of my condition as I aim—through these gestures, and using them as an “ analogon ”—at being an imaginary café waiter.  16 What I am trying to actualize is a being-in-itself of the café waiter, as if it were not precisely in my power to confer upon the duties of my station their value and their urgency, as if it were not my own free choice to get up each morning at five o’clock, or to stay in bed, even if that gets me sacked.  As if, by the very fact of maintaining this role in existence, I did not transcend it from all sides and did not constitute myself as being beyond my condition.  However, there can be no doubt that in one sense I am a café waiter—otherwise would it not be equally possible to call myself a diplomat or a journalist? But if I am him, it cannot be in the mode of being in itself.  I am the waiter in the mode of being what I am not .  Moreover, this does not apply only to social roles: I am never any of my attitudes, any of my ways of behaving.  A seductive speaker is someone who plays at speaking, because he cannot be a speaking being ; the attentive pupil who wants to be attentive exhausts himself—his gaze riveted on his teacher, all ears—in playing the attentive pupil, to the point where he can no longer listen to anything.  Constantly absent from my body and my actions, I am in spite of myself Valéry’s “divine absence.” 17 I cannot say either that I am here or that I am not, in the sense in which we might say “This box of matches is on the table”: that would conflate my “being-in-the-world” with a “being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.” Nor can I say that I am standing up, or that I am seated: that would conflate my body with the idiosyncratic totality in which it is just one structure.  I escape from being on all sides—and yet I am.  But here we have a mode of being that only concerns me: I am sad.  Can we not say, about this sadness that I am, that I am it in the mode of being what I am? Yet what is this sadness, other than the intentional unity that gathers together and animates my behavior in its entirety? It is the meaning of this lifeless way I look out at the world, of my hunched shoulders, my lowered head, the limpness of my whole body.  But surely I realize, in the very moment I act in these ways, that I am able not to act like that? Let a stranger suddenly appear, and I will raise my head, resume my lively and dynamic appearance: What remains of my sadness, other than the fact that I indulgently plan to return to it soon, after the visitor’s departure? Moreover, isn’t this sadness itself an action , a consciousness that imbues itself with sadness as it resorts to the use of magic in a pressing situation? 18 And even in this very example, isn’t being sad, in the first instance, to make oneself sad? “So be it,” one might say, “but even so, in adopting the being of sadness, haven’t we received that being? Where it is received from , after all, hardly matters.  The fact is that a consciousness that imbues itself with sadness is sad, precisely because of that.” But this would misunderstand the nature of consciousness: being-sad is not some ready-made being that I can give to myself, in the way I might give this book to my friend.  I do not have the power to take on being .  If I make myself sad, I must make myself sad through the entire expanse of my sadness: I am unable to profit from any acquired momentum and, without needing to re-create or to carry it, to allow my sadness to spin itself out like an inert body that can pursue its movement beyond the initial impact: in consciousness, there is no inertia.  If I make myself sad, it is because I am not sad: the being of my sadness eludes me, through and in my very act of adopting it.  The being-in-itself of sadness constantly haunts my consciousness (of) being sad, but as a value that I cannot actualize, as a regulative meaning of my sadness, and not as its constitutive modality.  Might it be said that at least my consciousness is , whatever object or state it makes itself conscious of? But how can we distinguish my sadness from my consciousness (of) being sad? Are they not the same? It is true, in one way, that my consciousness is , if we take that to mean that, for the Other, it forms part of the totality of being about which judgments can be made.  But we must observe, as Husserl clearly saw, that my consciousness appears to the Other from the outset as an absence.  It is the object whose constant presence is the meaning of all my attitudes and behavior—and that is always absent, because it is given to the Other’s intuition as a constant question or, better still, as a constant freedom.  When Pierre looks at me, I know without doubt that he is looking at me: his eyes—things in the world—are riveted on my body—a thing in the world; that is the objective fact of which I can say “It is .” But it is also a fact that belongs to the world .  The meaning of this look is not, and that is what bothers me.  Whatever I do—smile, promise, threaten—nothing can win me the approval, the free judgment I am seeking.  I know that it is always “beyond,” and I can feel it in my very actions, which no longer maintain the workmanlike character they have in relation to things, which are—insofar as I relate them to the Other—no longer for me anything but mere presentations , waiting to be constituted as gracious or clumsy, sincere or insincere, etc., by an apprehension that is always beyond all my efforts to provoke it, and which they can never provoke unless of its own accord it lends them its strength—an apprehension that exists only insofar as it is provoked from outside, and which is like its own mediation with the transcendent .  In this way, the objective fact of the being-in-itself of the Other’s consciousness posits itself, only to dissolve into negativity and freedom: the Other’s consciousness is as not being, the being-in-itself of its “now” and its “here” is to not be.  The Other’s consciousness is what it is not.  And furthermore my own consciousness does not appear to me in its being like the Other’s consciousness.  My consciousness is, because it makes itself—since its being is a consciousness of being.  But that means the making maintains the being: consciousness has its own being to be, and it is never maintained by being; it is consciousness that maintains being within subjectivity, which means once again that it is inhabited by being but without being it.  Consciousness is not what it is.  In these conditions, what can the ideal of sincerity mean, other than a task that is impossible to accomplish and whose meaning contradicts the structure of my consciousness? “To be sincere,” we said, “is to be what one is.” This presupposes that I am not originally what I am.  But here, of course, Kant’s “You must, therefore you can” 19 is implicitly granted.  I can become sincere—as my duty and my effort to be sincere imply.  Now, precisely, we can see that the original structure of “not being what one is” makes it impossible from the outset to progress toward being in itself, or “being what one is.” And this impossibility is not hidden from consciousness: on the contrary, it is the very fabric of consciousness; it is our constantly experienced unease; it is our inability even to recognize, or to constitute, ourselves as being what we are; it is the necessity that requires that, as soon as we posit ourselves—by means of a valid judgment, based on inner experience, or correctly inferred from a priori or empirical premises—as some specific being, we must surpass that being, through our very act of positing—and not toward another being but toward the void, toward a nothing .  How then can we blame anyone for not being sincere, or rejoice in our own sincerity, when at the same time this sincerity appears to us impossible? How can we even make a start—in our speech, our confession, our soul-searching—at trying to be sincere, since this endeavor is essentially doomed to fail and since, at the very moment when we announce it, we have a prejudicative understanding of its futility? In examining myself, my goal is, in effect, to determine exactly what I am, in order to resolve that I will be it, without deviation—even if that sets me searching, thereafter, for the means by which I might be changed.  But what does this aim amount to, other than that of constituting myself as a thing? Am I able to determine the set of reasons and motives that led me to perform this or that action? But that would already be to hypothesize a process of causal determinism, constituting the flux of my consciousness as if it were a succession of physical states.  Will I discover—even if I am ashamed to admit to them—certain “tendencies” within me? 20 But in that case wouldn’t I be forgetting that these tendencies are actualized with my cooperation, that they are not forces of nature, and that, by constantly deciding on their value, I lend them their efficacy? Will I bring some judgment to bear on my character, or my nature? But isn’t that to conceal from myself, at that very moment, something that in any case I know: that I am hereby judging a past, from which my present by definition escapes? We can see proof of this insofar as the same man who—in sincerity—posits that he is just what, in fact, he was will be indignant at the Other’s resentment, and will try to fend it off by claiming he is no longer able to be what he was.  We are readily surprised and saddened that the penalties imposed by the courts weigh on a man who, in his renewed freedom, is no longer the culprit that he was.  But at the same time we demand this man to recognize himself as being this culprit.  What, therefore, is sincerity, other than a phenomenon, precisely, of bad faith? Indeed, have we not shown that bad faith is a matter of constituting human-reality as a being that is what it is not, and is not what it is? It is common for a homosexual to feel intolerably guilty, and for that feeling to condition his entire existence.  We can predict without difficulty that this man is in bad faith.  And often, in fact, such a man—even while he admits to his homosexual weakness, even while he acknowledges, one at a time, each particular sin he has committed—will refuse with all his might to consider himself “a pederast.” 21 His case is always “different,” and particular: it involves games, accidents, mishaps; those mistakes are in the past; they can be explained by a particular conception of beauty that women are unable to instantiate; we should see them as the outcome of an anxious pursuit, rather than as manifestations of a deeply rooted drive, etc.  Here we have, without doubt, a man whose bad faith borders on the comical as, while admitting to all the deeds ascribed to him, he refuses to draw the clear consequence.  His friend—who is his harshest critic—therefore becomes irritated by this duplicity.  The critic only demands one thing—and maybe then he would show some leniency: that the culprit should recognize his guilt, that the homosexual should straightforwardly declare—whether in a spirit of humility or assertion hardly matters— “I am a pederast.” Here we can ask: Who is in bad faith? The homosexual or the champion of sincerity? The homosexual acknowledges his misdemeanors, but he fights with all his strength against the crushing perspective from which his mistakes constitute for him a destiny .  He does not want to let others regard him as a thing: he understands, obscurely but powerfully, that a homosexual is not a homosexual in the way this table is a table, or this red-haired man is a redhead.  It seems to him that he can escape from any mistake, the moment he posits and acknowledges it, or—even better—that psychological duration, by itself, washes him clean of every misdemeanor, constitutes an indeterminate future for him, and allows him to be born anew.  Is he wrong? Is he not recognizing, by himself, the peculiar and irreducible character of human-reality? His attitude, therefore, contains an undeniable understanding of the truth.  But at the same time he needs this continual renaissance, this constant escape, in order to live; to avoid the community’s terrible judgment, he has constantly to place himself out of reach.  In this way, he plays on the meaning of “ being .” In fact he would be right, if he understood this sentence, “I am not a pederast,” to mean: “I am not what I am.” If he declared, in other words, that “to the extent to which a set of actions is defined as a pederast’s behavior, and I have performed these actions, I am a pederast.  To the extent that human-reality escapes any definition in terms of its behavior, I am not one.” But he slides toward another meaning of “being.” He means “not being” in the sense of “not being in itself.” He asserts that he “is not a pederast” in the sense in which this table is not an inkwell.  He is in bad faith.  But the champion of sincerity is not unaware of human-reality’s transcendence and knows, when the need arises, how to assert it to his advantage.  He even makes use of it, and posits it within his present demand: Doesn’t he want the homosexual, in the name of sincerity—and therefore of freedom—to look back at himself and to recognize himself as a homosexual? Isn’t he suggesting that such a confession would elicit his indulgence? What can this mean, other than that the man who recognizes himself as homosexual will no longer be the same as the homosexual he recognizes himself to be, and will escape into the domain of freedom and the good will? 22 He is therefore asking him to be what he is, in order no longer to be what he is.  That is the true meaning of the saying “A fault confessed is half-redressed.” He demands that the culprit constitute himself as a thing, precisely in order to stop treating him as a thing.  And this contradiction is constitutive of what sincerity requires.  Indeed, who could fail to see the offense caused to the Other, and the reassurance secured for me, in an utterance like “Bah! He’s a pederast”—which erases with a single stroke an unnerving freedom, and aims to constitute henceforth all the Other’s actions as if they were consequences that followed directly from his essence.  Yet that is what the critic requires of his victim: that he constitute himself as a thing, and hand over his freedom to him like a fief, in order for the critic then to give it back to him, like a suzerain to his loyal subject.  To the extent that the champion of sincerity wants to reassure himself (while he claims to be passing judgment), and to the extent that he demands of a freedom, insofar as it is freedom, to constitute itself as a thing, he is in bad faith.  What we see here is only an episode in that fight to the death between consciousnesses that Hegel called “the master-slave relationship.” 23 Consciousness is called on and required, in the name of its nature as consciousness, radically to destroy itself as a consciousness while it is made to hope, beyond this destruction, for a rebirth.  Be that as it may, one might say, but our man is using sincerity inappropriately, as a weapon against the Other.  We should not be looking for sincerity in relations of “ Mitsein ” but in its pure form: in one’s relations with oneself.  But who could fail to see that objective sincerity is constituted in the same way? Who could fail to see that the sincere man, by the very act of sincerity, constitutes himself as a thing precisely in order to escape the condition of a thing? The man who admits that he is malicious has traded his troubling “freedom-to-do-wrong” for an inanimate character of malice: he is malicious; he adheres to himself; he is what he is.  But at the same time he escapes from this thing , since he is the person contemplating it, and since it depends on him whether he maintains it in front of his eyes, or allows it to collapse into an infinity of individual acts.  He makes his sincerity a merit , and a meritorious man is not malicious insofar as he is malicious but insofar as he exists beyond his malice.  At the same time, the malice is defused, since if it only exists deterministically it is nothing, and since, by acknowledging it, I posit my freedom in relation to it; my future is virgin, so everything is permitted.  In this way, sincerity’s essential structure does not differ from that of bad faith, since the sincere man constitutes himself as what he is in order not to be it .  That explains the universally recognized truth that by dint of being sincere one can end up in bad faith.  Stendhal would be such a case, Valéry said.  Complete and constant sincerity as a constant attempt to adhere to oneself is, by its nature, a constant attempt to dissociate from oneself; the act through which one makes oneself into an object for oneself is itself an act of self-liberation.  To keep constant account of what one is amounts to a constant disavowal of oneself; it is to take refuge in a sphere in which one is no longer anything but a pure and free act of looking.  The goal of bad faith, we said, is to put oneself out of reach; it is an act of flight.  We can see now that sincerity has to be defined in the same terms.  What does this mean? In fact, in the end, the goals of sincerity and bad faith are not that different.  Of course, there is a type of sincerity—which is not our concern here—that bears on our past: I am sincere if I admit that I had this pleasure or that intention.  We will see that, if this type of sincerity is possible, it is because man’s being, as it slides into the past, becomes constituted as a being in itself.  But our sole concern here is the type of sincerity that targets itself, in the immanence of the present.  What is its goal? To admit to what I am, in order to make myself at last coincide with my being; in brief, to make it the case that I am, in the mode of the in-itself, what I am in the mode of “not being what I am.” And its premise is that I am basically already, in the mode of the in-itself, what I have to be.  Thus we encounter, in the depths of sincerity, an incessant play of mirrors and reflections, a constant transition from being that is what it is into being that is not what it is and—in the other direction—from being that is not what it is to being that is what it is.  And what is the goal of bad faith? To make it the case that I am what I am, in the mode of “not being what one is,” or that I am not what I am, in the mode of “being what one is.” Here again we encounter the same play of mirrors.  Indeed, in order for the intention to be sincere to exist, it is necessary that—from the outset and at the same time—I am and I am not what I am.  Sincerity does not assign a particular quality or way of being to me but, in relation to the quality at issue, it aims to move me from one mode of being into another mode of being.  And my nature prohibits me from achieving this second mode of being—the ideal of sincerity—and, at the very moment when I endeavor to achieve it, I understand—obscurely and prejudicatively—that I will not achieve it.  But, similarly, for me to be able merely to conceive an intention to be in bad faith, I must, by my nature, escape in my being from my being.  If I were sad or cowardly in the way this inkwell is an inkwell, the possibility of bad faith could not even be conceived.  I would not only be unable to escape from my being but I would be unable even to imagine that I might escape from it.  But if bad faith is possible, simply as a project, that is just because, in relation to my being, the distinction between being and not being is not all that clear.  Bad faith is possible only because sincerity is conscious of missing its mark, by its nature.  I can only try to grasp myself as “not being a coward”—when I “am” a coward—if my “being a coward” is “in question” in the very moment of its existence, and if it is itself a question, and if, in the very moment when I want to grasp it, it escapes from me on all sides, and is annihilated.  The condition of my being able to attempt to be in bad faith is that in one sense I am not this coward who I do not want to be.  But if I was not a coward, in the straightforward mode of not-being-what-one-is-not, I would be “in good faith” in declaring that I am not a coward.  Thus it must be the case that, in addition, I am in some way that unreachable, evanescent coward who I am not.  And we should not take this to mean that I must be “a bit” of a coward, in the sense in which “a bit” means “to a certain extent a coward—and to a certain extent not a coward.” No: it is a complete coward, and a coward in all of its aspects, that I must be and, at the same time, not be.  Thus bad faith requires, in this case, that I am not what I am, i.e., that an imponderable difference separates being from non-being, in the mode of being that belongs to human-reality.  But bad faith does not confine itself to refusing the qualities I possess, or to failing to see the being that I am.  It also tries to constitute me as being what I am not.  It apprehends me as being positively courageous, when I am not.  And once again, that is possible only if I am what I am not, i.e., only if the non-being in me lacks being, even in its capacity as non-being.  Of course, it is necessary that I should not be courageous; otherwise bad faith would not be bad faith.  But in addition, my effort at bad faith must encompass an ontological understanding that, even in my everyday being, I am not really what I am , and that there is not such a difference between, for example, the being of “being-sad”—which I am in the mode of not being what I am—and the “not-being” of the not-being-courageous that I wish to conceal from myself.  In addition, and above all, it is necessary for this very negation of being to be, itself, the object of a constant nihilation, and for the very meaning of “not being” in human-reality to be constantly in question.  If I was not courageous in the way in which an inkwell is not a table—which is to say, if I was isolated in my cowardice, stubbornly sticking to it, and incapable of relating it to its opposite—or if I was not capable of determining myself as cowardly—which is to say of negating any courage in relation to myself, and thereby escaping from my cowardice at the very moment in which I posit it—or if it was not necessarily impossible for me to coincide with my not-being-courageous (just as with my being-cowardly ), any project of bad faith would be ruled out.  Thus, in order for bad faith to be possible, it is necessary that sincerity itself should be in bad faith.  The condition of possibility of bad faith is that human-reality, in its most proximate being, in the internal structure of the prereflective cogito , should be what it is not and not be what it is.  III.  THE “FAITH” OF BAD FAITH But so far we have only pointed out the conditions that make bad faith conceivable, the structures of being that make it possible to form the concepts used by bad faith.  We cannot limit ourselves to these considerations: we have not yet distinguished bad faith from lying; the ambiguous concepts that we have described could, doubtless, be put to use by a liar to confound his interlocutor, even though their ambiguity, 24 being founded in man’s being and not on some empirical circumstance, can and ought to be apparent to everyone.  Clearly, the real problem of bad faith arises from the fact that bad faith is faith .  It cannot consist either in a cynical lie or in anything evident, if “evidence” means the possession of an object in intuition.  But if we can give the name “belief” to the union of being with its object, where the object is either not given, or given indistinctly, then bad faith will count as belief, and the problem of bad faith is essentially a problem about belief.  How can one believe, in bad faith, in concepts that have been deliberately forged for the purpose of persuading oneself? We must note that, in effect, the project of bad faith must itself be in bad faith: I am not in bad faith only when my endeavor is over, when I have constructed my ambiguous concepts and persuaded myself.  To tell the truth, I have not persuaded myself: insofar as I ever could be persuaded, I always have been.  And it was necessary, at the very moment when I was about to put myself in bad faith, for me to be in bad faith in relation to that inclination itself.  To represent it to myself as bad faith would have been cynical; to sincerely believe it to be innocent would have been good faith.  The decision to be in bad faith dares not speak its name; it believes, and it does not believe, that it is in bad faith.  And, from the moment bad faith arises, that decision entirely determines one’s subsequent attitude and, in a way, the Weltanschauung of bad faith.  For bad faith does not retain the norms and criteria of truth that are accepted by the critical thinking of good faith.  Effectively, and from the outset, bad faith determines the nature of truth.  Alongside bad faith, a truth appears, a method of thinking, a type of being possessed by objects; and the ontological characteristic of this world of bad faith, in which the subject suddenly immerses himself, is that, in it, being is what it is not, and is not what it is.  In consequence, a particular type of evidence appears: non-persuasive evidence.  Bad faith apprehends facts that are evident, but it is resigned in advance not to be fulfilled by such evidence, 25 not to be persuaded and transformed into good faith.  The person in bad faith becomes humble and modest: he is aware, he says, that faith is a decision and that after each intuition one is obliged to determine what is and to will it .  Thus, in its basic project and from the moment it arises, bad faith determines the precise nature of its requirements: it becomes visible in its entirety in its resolution not to ask for too much , to consider itself satisfied when it is poorly persuaded, to force through, by means of a decision, its adherence to uncertain truths.  This primary project of bad faith is a decision, in bad faith, about the nature of faith.  This must be understood not as a reflective and voluntary decision but rather as a spontaneous determination of our being.  One puts oneself into bad faith as one goes to sleep, and being in bad faith is like dreaming.  Once this mode of being is actualized, it is as difficult to leave it as to wake up: the fact is that bad faith—like being awake or dreaming—is a type of being in the world that tends to perpetuate itself of its own accord, even though its structure is metastable in kind.  But bad faith is conscious of its structure, and has taken precautions by deciding that a metastable structure is the structure of being, and that the structure of all our convictions is non-persuasive.  Still, if bad faith is faith, and if its own negation forms part of its most basic project (I resolve to be poorly convinced in order to convince myself that I am what I am not), it must be possible from the outset for there to be a type of faith willing its own lack of conviction.  What are the conditions of possibility of this type of faith? I believe that my friend Pierre has friendly feelings toward me.  I believe this in good faith .  I believe it and I have no intuition attended by evidence of these feelings, because such an object, by its nature, does not lend itself to intuition.  I believe it , which is to say I give in to my impulses to trust, I decide to believe it and to stand by my decision, and, finally, I behave as if I were certain of it—all within the synthetic unity of a single attitude.  What I define in these terms as good faith is what Hegel called the immediate ; it is “simple faith.” 26 Hegel goes straight on to show that the immediate calls for mediation, and that belief, by becoming belief for itself , passes over into the state of non-belief.  If I believe my friend Pierre likes me, I will see his friendliness as the meaning of all his actions.  Belief is a distinctive consciousness of the meaning of Pierre’s actions.  But if I know that I believe, belief appears as a purely subjective determination, without any external correlate.  That is why the verb itself—“to believe”—can refer, indifferently, to the unshakable assurance of a belief (“My God, I believe in you”) and to its neutralized and strictly subjective character (“Is Pierre my friend? I have no idea: I believe he is”).  But the nature of consciousness is such that, in it, the mediate and the immediate are one and the same being.  To believe is to know one believes, and to know one believes is to believe no longer.  Thus, to believe—because it is only to believe—is to believe no longer; and all this is within the unity of a single non-thetic consciousness (of) self.  Of course, we have stretched the description of the phenomenon here, by referring to it as knowledge : non-thetic consciousness is not knowledge .  But, through its very translucency, it lies at the origin of all knowledge.  In this way, one’s non-thetic consciousness (of) believing is destructive of belief.  But at the same time, the law of the prereflective cogito dictates that the being of believing must be a consciousness of believing.  Thus, belief is a being that puts itself in question in its own being, and that can be actualized only in its destruction; it is a being that can become manifest to itself only by negating itself, a being for which to be is to appear, and to appear is to negate itself.  To believe is not to believe.  We can see why: the being of consciousness is to exist through itself, and so to make itself be, and, thereby, to surmount itself.  In this sense, consciousness is constantly escaping from itself: belief turns into non-belief, the immediate into mediation, the absolute into the relative, and the relative into the absolute.  The ideal of good faith (to believe what one believes) is—like the ideal of sincerity (to be what one is)—an ideal of being-in-itself.  No belief is ever enough of a belief; we never believe in what we believe.  And, in consequence, the basic project of bad faith merely makes use of this self-destruction of any conscious state.  If every belief in good faith is an impossible belief, a place exists for every impossible belief.  My incapacity to believe I am courageous will no longer discourage me, since, precisely, no belief can ever believe enough.  I will define this impossible belief as my belief.  Of course, I cannot hide from myself that I believe in order not to believe, and that I do not believe in order to believe.  But bad faith’s subtle and complete self-annihilation should not surprise me: it exists at the heart of all faith.  What, then, does it involve? That at the moment when I wish to believe I am courageous, I know I am a coward? And this certainty is what will destroy my belief? But, in the first place , I am no more courageous than cowardly, if we are to understand these in terms of the mode of being of the in-itself.  In the second place, I do not know I am courageous; such a view of myself could be accompanied only by belief , because it surpasses the pure certainty of reflection.  In the third place, it is quite true that bad faith does not manage to believe what it wants to believe.  But it is precisely in virtue of its accepting not to believe what it believes that it is bad faith.  Good faith wants to flee from “not believing what one believes” into being; bad faith flees from being into “not believing what one believes.” It has disarmed any belief in advance: the beliefs it wants to acquire and, at the same time, the beliefs from which it wants to escape.  By willing this self-destruction on the part of belief—which science evades by moving toward evidence—it ruins any beliefs that might be opposed to it, which reveal themselves to be only belief.  In this way we can better understand the basic phenomenon of bad faith.  There is no cynical lie in bad faith, or any knowing preparation of misleading concepts.  But bad faith’s most basic act is to flee from something it is impossible to flee from: to flee from what one is.  Now, the very project of flight reveals to bad faith an internal disintegration at the heart of being—and this disintegration is what it wants to be.  In fact, the two immediate attitudes that we can take up in relation to our being are both conditioned by the very nature of our being, and its immediate relation with the in-itself.  Good faith seeks to flee from the internal disintegration of my being, in the direction of the in-itself that it ought to be, and is not.  Bad faith seeks to flee from the in-itself into the internal disintegration of my being.  But it denies this very disintegration, just as it denies its own bad faith.  In fleeing, through “not-being-what-one-is,” from the in-itself that I am not in the mode of being what one is not, bad faith—which disavows its own bad faith—aims at the in-itself that I am not in the mode of “not-being-what-one-is-not.” 27 If bad faith is possible, that is because it threatens—immediately and permanently—every project made by human beings, and because consciousness harbors in its being the permanent risk of bad faith.  And the source of that risk is that consciousness is what it is not and is not what it is, in its being and simultaneously.  In the light of these observations, we can now begin an ontological study of consciousness, not as the totality of human being but as its instantaneous kernel.  Title Page Chapter 1: The Other’s Existence Chapter 1 GT259 THE OTHER’S EXISTENCE I.  THE PROBLEM We have described human-reality on the basis of its forms of negative behavior and the cogito .  By following this guiding thread we discovered that human-reality was-for-itself.  Is that the whole of what it is? Without abandoning our standpoint of reflective description, we can encounter modes of consciousness that seem, even while they remain in themselves strictly for-itself, to point to a radically different type of ontological structure.  This ontological structure is mine , which is to say that my concerns are on my account and yet this concern “for myself” reveals to me a being that is my being without being-for-myself.  For example, let us consider shame.  It involves a mode of consciousness whose structure is identical to all the structures we have previously described.  It is a non-positional consciousness (of) self as shame and, as such, it is an example of what the Germans call Erlebnis ; it is accessible to reflection.  In addition, its structure is intentional; it is an ashamed apprehension of something, and that something is me .  I am ashamed of what I am .  Shame therefore brings about an intimate relation between me and myself: through shame I have discovered an aspect of my being.  And yet, although some complex and derivative forms of shame can appear at the level of reflection, shame is not in the first instance a phenomenon of reflection.  In effect, whatever results one might be able to obtain alone through the religious practice of shame, shame in its primary structure is shame before somebody .  I have just made some clumsy or vulgar gesture: this gesture sticks to me; I neither judge it nor blame it; I simply live it; I actualize it in the mode of the for-itself.  But now, all of a sudden I raise my head: somebody was there, and has seen me.  All at once I realize the vulgarity of my gesture in its entirety, and I am ashamed.  It is evident that my shame is not reflective, because the Other’s presence to my consciousness—even in the role of a catalyst—is incompatible with the attitude of reflection; within the field of my reflection the only consciousness that I can encounter is mine.  Now, the Other is the indispensable intermediary between me and myself: I am ashamed of myself as I appear to the Other.  And merely by appearing the Other enables me to pass judgment on myself as I might pass judgment on an object, for it is as an object that I appear to the Other.  However, this object that has appeared to the Other is not an idle image in some other’s mind.  Such an image could, in effect, be entirely imputed to the Other, and it could not “touch” me.  I might feel irritation or anger in relation to it, as if I were placed before a bad portrait of myself, attributing to me an ugliness or a baseness of expression that is not mine; but it would not be able to reach me at my core; inherently, shame is recognition .  I recognize that I am as the Other sees me.  There is no question, however, of any comparison between what I am for myself and what I am for the Other—as if I could find within myself, in the mode of being of the for-itself, an equivalent of what I am for the Other.  In the first place, we do not encounter such a comparison as a particular psychological operation within ourselves: shame is an immediate shudder that runs through me from head to toe, without any discursive preparation.  And next, that comparison is impossible: I am unable to place what I am in the intimacy of the for-itself—without distance, or detachment, or perspective—in relation to the being, unjustifiable and in itself, that I am for the Other.  There is no yardstick or table of correspondences here.  Moreover, the very notion of vulgarity implies an inter-monadic relation.  One cannot be vulgar all alone.  Thus the Other has not only shown me what I was; he has constituted me in a new type of being, obliging me to support new qualifications.  This being was not in me as a potentiality before the Other appeared, because within the for-itself there could have been no place for it; and, even if we wanted to attribute to me a body that was entirely constituted before it existed for others, we could not accommodate my vulgarity or my clumsiness as potentialities within it because they are meanings and, as such, they surpass my body and refer us to a witness disposed to understand them and, at the same time, to the totality of my human-reality.  But this new being that appears for the Other does not reside in the Other; I am responsible for it, as we can see clearly in the method of education that consists in making children “ashamed” of what they are.  In this way shame is shame of myself before the Other ; these two structures are inseparable.  But, by the same token, I need the Other in order to fully grasp all the structures of my being; my for-itself refers to my for-the-Other.  If, therefore, we want to grasp the relation of being between man and being-in-itself in its totality, we cannot rest content with the descriptions that we sketched out in the preceding chapters of this work.  We are obliged to answer two quite differently formidable questions: in the first place, the question of the Other’s existence, and then the question of my relation of being to the Other’s being.  II.  THE REEF OF SOLIPSISM It is strange that realists have never really worried about the problem of Others.  To the extent that, for the realist, “everything” is “given,” it probably seems to him that he is given the Other.  What, indeed, in the midst of the real, could be more real than the Other? Here is a thinking substance with the same essence as me, which cannot disappear into secondary qualities and primary qualities, and whose essential structures I can find in myself.  Nonetheless, to the extent that realism attempts to account for knowledge by means of the world’s acting on a thinking substance, it has not been concerned to establish any immediate and reciprocal action of the thinking substances between themselves.  It is through the intermediary of the world that they communicate; between the Other’s consciousness and mine, my body as a worldly thing and the Other’s body are necessary intermediaries.  The Other’s soul is therefore separated from mine by all the distance that separates in the first instance my soul from my body, then my body from the Other’s body, and finally the Other’s body from his soul.  And if it is uncertain whether the for-itself’s relation to the body is a relation of externality (we will be discussing this problem later), it is at least evident that the relation of my body with the Other’s body is a relation of pure indifferent externality.  If souls are separated by their bodies, they are distinct in the way that this inkwell is distinct from this book, which means it is impossible to conceive of any immediate presence of the one to the other.  And even if we were to allow that my soul was immediately present to the Other’s body, I would still fall short, by the entire breadth of a body, of reaching through to his soul.  If therefore realism founds its certainty on the spatio-temporal thing’s presence “in person” to my consciousness, it cannot lay claim to the same evidence for the reality of the Other’s soul, since, by its own admission, that soul is not given in person to mine: it is an absence, a meaning; the body points toward it without delivering it up.  In brief, in a philosophy founded on intuition, there is no intuition of the Other’s soul.  Now, if we are not playing with words, this means that realism makes no room for the intuition of an Other : it does not help to say that at least we are given the other’s body, and that this body is a certain presence of the Other, or of a part of the Other: it is true that the body belongs, as one of its structures, to the totality that we are calling “human-reality.” But it is a man’s body , precisely, only insofar as it exists within the indissoluble unity of that totality, just as an organ is a living organ only within the totality of an organism.  By delivering the body to us not as contained within the human totality but apart from it, like a stone or a tree, or a piece of wax, the position of realism has killed the body as definitively as the physiologist’s scalpel does, when it separates a piece of flesh from the totality of the living thing.  It is not the Other’s body that is present to the realist’s intuition: it is a body—a body that, doubtless, has a particular ἕξις and particular aspects, but which belongs nevertheless within the large family of bodies.  If it is true, for a spiritualist realism, that the soul is easier to know than the body, it will be easier to know the body than the Other’s soul.  In truth, the realist does not greatly concern himself with this problem: that is because he holds the Other’s existence to be certain.  That is why the realist, positivist psychology of the nineteenth century, which took my fellow man’s existence as granted, is exclusively concerned to establish the means by which I can know this existence, and to decipher on the body the traces of a consciousness that is foreign to me.  The body, it is said, is an object whose ἕξις calls for a particular interpretation.  The hypothesis that best accounts for its ways of behaving is that of a consciousness that is analogous to mine, whose various emotions it reflects.  What remains to be explained is how we form this hypothesis: sometimes we will be told that it is through an analogy with what I know about myself, at other times that we learn from experience how to decipher, for example, the sudden coloring of a face as a promise of blows and of furious shouts.  It will be readily acknowledged that these methods can only give us a knowledge of the Other that is probable ; it will remain always probable that the Other is only a body.  If animals are machines, why shouldn’t the man whom I see walking down the street be one? Why shouldn’t the behaviorists’ radical hypothesis be correct? What I apprehend on this face is nothing but the effect of certain muscular contractions, and these in their turn are only the effect of a nerve impulse whose path is known to me.  Why should we not reduce the set of these reactions to some simple or conditioned reflexes? But the majority of psychologists remain convinced of the Other’s existence as a totalizing reality with the same structure as their own.  For them, the Other’s existence is certain and the knowledge that we have of it is probable.  We can see the sophistry of realism.  In fact we ought to reverse the terms of this claim and acknowledge that, if the Other is accessible to us only through the knowledge that we have of him, and if this knowledge is only conjectural, the Other’s existence is only conjectural and the task of critical reflection will be to determine its exact degree of probability.  Thus, through a curious reversal, by having posited the reality of the external world, the realist is obliged to slide into idealism when he considers the Other’s existence.  If the body is a real object, acting really on the thinking substance, the Other becomes a mere representation, whose esse is a mere percipi , i.e., whose existence is measured by the knowledge that we have of it.  The more modern theories of Einfühlung , sympathy , and forms only improve the description of our means of presentifying the Other, but they do not place the debate on its true terrain: whether the Other is in the first instance sensed , or whether he appears in our experience as a singular form prior to any habit and in the absence of any analogical inference, it remains no less the case that the signifying and sensed object and the expressive form direct us purely and simply toward a human totality whose existence remains purely and simply conjectural.  If realism returns us in this way to idealism, would it not be more prudent to place ourselves immediately within the perspective of critical idealism? Since the Other is “my representation,” would it not be better to investigate this representation within a system that reduces the set of objects to a connected group of representations, and which measures every existence by the knowledge that I have of it? Yet someone like Kant will be of little help to us: concerned as he was to establish universal laws of subjectivity, the same for everyone, he did not in fact address the question of persons .  The subject is only the essence that is common to those persons; it will no more allow us to determine their multiplicity than man’s essence, for Spinoza, allows us to determine the multiplicity of concrete men.  At first sight it seems therefore that Kant placed the problem of the Other among those that were not relevant to his critique.  But let us take a closer look: the Other is given, as such, within our experience; the Other is an object, a particular object.  Kant took up the point of view of the pure subject in order to determine the conditions of possibility not just for an object in general but for various categories of object: the physical object, the mathematical object, the object that is beautiful or ugly, and the one that presents teleological characteristics.  From this point of view, his work has been reproached for its lacunae, and some have wanted, for example, to establish—in the Dilthean tradition—the conditions of possibility for the historical object, i.e., to attempt a critique of historical reason.  Similarly, if it is true that the Other represents a particular type of object disclosed to our experience, it is necessary, even within the perspective of a strict Kantianism, to ask how knowledge of the Other is possible, i.e., to establish the conditions of possibility for the experience of others.  It would really be a great mistake to assimilate the problem of the Other to the problem of noumenal realities.  Of course, if Others exist, and if they are similar to me, the question of their intelligible existence can arise in relation to them, as the question of my noumenal existence can arise for me; and also, of course, the same answer will apply in relation to them and to me: this noumenal existence may only be thought but not conceived.  1 But in my everyday experience, when I aim at the Other, what I am aiming at is not at all a noumenal reality—any more than I apprehend or aim at my intelligible reality when I gain empirical knowledge of my emotions or my thoughts.  The Other is a phenomenon which refers to other phenomena: to an anger-phenomenon which he experiences toward me, to a series of thoughts which appear to him as phenomena of his inner sense; what I aim at in the Other is nothing more than what I might find in myself.  Only these phenomena are radically distinct from all others.  In the first place, the Other’s appearing within my experience is manifested by the presence of structured forms—such as facial and other expressions, actions and ways of behaving.  These structured forms point toward an organizing unity that is situated by definition outside our experience.  It is the Other’s anger, insofar as it belongs to his inner sense and insofar as it is by its nature denied to my apperception, that is the meaning and perhaps the cause of the series of phenomena that I apprehend in my experience under the heading “expression,” facial or otherwise.  The Other, as the synthetic unity of his experiences, and, equally, as will and as passion, comes to organize my experience.  What is involved is not the straightforward action of an unknowable noumenon on my sensibility but the constitution, within the field of my experience, by a being that is not me, of combined groups of phenomena.  And these phenomena, in contrast to all the others, do not point toward possible experiences but toward experiences that are, by definition, outside my experience and which belong to a system that is inaccessible to me.  But, on the other hand, the condition of possibility for any experience is that the subject should organize his impressions into a combined system.  In this way we can find in things “only what we have put there.” The other cannot therefore appear to us, on pain of contradiction, as organizing our experience: the phenomenon would be overdetermined.  Can we still make use of causality here? This question is a good example of the ambiguous character of the other within Kantian philosophy.  In effect, the only things that causality can combine together are phenomena.  But the anger felt by the other is, precisely, a phenomenon, and the furious expression that I perceive is another.  Can there be a causal link between them? That would be consistent with their phenomenal nature; and in that sense I do not hold myself back from regarding the red of Paul’s face as the effect of his anger; that forms part of the assertions I habitually make.  But, on the other hand, causality makes sense only if it connects the phenomena of one same experience, and contributes to constituting that experience.  Can it be used as a bridge between two radically separated experiences? Here we should note that, in using it in that capacity, I would strip it of its nature as an ideal unification of empirical appearances: Kant’s causality is a unification of the moments of my time, in the form of irreversibility.  How could we allow that it unified my time and the other’s? What temporal relation could we establish between the decision to express oneself—as a phenomenon that appeared within the weave of the Other’s experience—and its expression, a phenomenon in my experience? Simultaneity? Succession? But how could an instant of my time be in a relation of simultaneity or succession with an instant of the Other’s time? Even if a preestablished harmony—which would in any case be incomprehensible within the Kantian perspective—were able to make the two times in question correspond, instant to instant, we would still be left with no less than two times without relation, since, for each of them, the unifying synthesis of moments is an act of the subject.  The universality of time, in Kant’s thought, is only the universality of a concept; it implies only that each temporality has to possess a determinate structure, and that the conditions of possibility for a temporal experience apply to every temporality.  But this identity of temporal essence does not rule out an incommunicable diversity of times, any more than the identity of man’s essence rules out an incommunicable diversity of human consciousnesses.  In this way, since the relation between consciousnesses is by its nature unthinkable, the concept of the Other cannot constitute our experience; it needs to be ranked, along with the teleological concepts, among the regulative concepts.  The Other therefore belongs to the category of “as-ifs”; it is an a priori hypothesis that has no justification other than the unity that it enables to be brought about within our experience, and which it is impossible to think without contradiction.  Indeed, if it is possible to conceive—purely as an instance of knowledge—of an intelligible reality acting on our sensibility, it is nevertheless not even thinkable that a phenomenon, whose reality is strictly relative to its appearing within the Other’s experience, might really act upon a phenomenon of my experience .  And even if we were to allow that the action of an intelligible reality might operate at the same time on my experience and on the Other’s (such that the intelligible reality would be affecting the Other to just the extent that it was affecting me), it would remain no less radically impossible to establish, or even to postulate, a parallelism and a table of correspondences between two systems spontaneously constituting themselves.  2 But, on the other hand, is the status of a regulative concept really appropriate for the concept of the Other? What is at issue is not, in fact, to establish a stronger unity between the phenomena of my experience by means of a purely formal concept which would simply enable discoveries of detail within the objects that appear to me.  What is at issue is not a kind of a priori hypothesis that does not reach beyond the field of my experience, and which conduces to new investigations within the very limits of that field.  The perception of the Other-object directs me to a coherent system of representations, and that system is not mine .  Consequently, the Other is not, within my experience, a phenomenon that points toward my experience but rather one that refers in principle to phenomena that are situated outside any possible experience for me.  And, to be sure, the concept of the Other enables discoveries and predictions within my system of representations, a narrowing in the weave of phenomena: thanks to the hypothesis of others , I am able to predict this movement on the basis of this expression.  But this concept does not present itself in the manner of those scientific notions (like imaginary numbers, for example) which come up in the course of a physical calculation, as instruments, without being present in the empirical description of the problem, and in order to be eliminated from the results.  The concept of the Other is not purely instrumental: rather than its existing for use in the unification of phenomena, we ought on the contrary to say that various categories of phenomena seem only to exist for it.  The existence of a system of meanings and experiences that are radically distinct from mine is the fixed framework toward which diverse series of phenomena are pointing , even as they flow.  And this framework, which is by definition external to my experience, is gradually fulfilled.  That Other , whose relation to myself cannot be apprehended, and who is never given, is gradually constituted by us as a concrete object: he is not the instrument of which I make use to predict an event within my experience; rather, it is the events in my experience that are used to constitute the Other as Other, i.e., as a system of representations that is beyond reach as a concrete and knowable object.  What I constantly aim at through my experiences is the Other’s feelings, the Other’s ideas, the Other’s acts of will, the Other’s character.  That is because the Other is not, in point of fact, only the one whom I see but the one who sees me .  I aim at the Other insofar as he is a connected system of experiences out of reach, within which I figure as one object among others.  But, to the extent to which I endeavor to determine the concrete nature of this system of representations, and the place that I occupy within it as an object, I radically transcend the field of my experience.  I concern myself with a series of phenomena which can never, as a matter of principle, be accessible to my intuition and, in consequence, I exceed the entitlements of my knowledge; I try to connect experiences that will never be my experiences with each other and, in consequence, this work of construction and unification can in no way serve to unify my own experience; to the extent that the Other is an absence, he escapes from nature .  We cannot therefore characterize the Other as a regulative concept.  And doubtless some ideas—like the World, for example—also escape my experience as a matter of principle, but at least they relate to it, and have meaning only through it.  The Other, on the contrary, is presented as in some sense the radical negation of my experience, since he is the one for whom I am not a subject but an object.  As a subject of knowledge, therefore, I endeavor to determine as an object the subject who negates my character as a subject, and who is himself determining me as an object.  In this way, within the perspective of idealism, the other cannot be regarded either as a constitutive concept or as a regulative concept of my knowledge.  He is conceived as real and yet I am unable to grasp his real relation with me; I construct him as an object, and yet he is not given through intuition; I posit him as a subject and yet it is as the object of my thoughts that I consider him.  For the idealist, therefore, only two solutions remain: either to entirely get rid of the concept of the other, and prove that he is unnecessary to the constitution of my experience; or to affirm the Other’s real existence, which amounts to positing a real and extra-empirical communication between consciousnesses.  The first solution is known under the name of solipsism.  But if it is formulated, in keeping with its designation, as the affirmation of my ontological solitude , it is a pure metaphysical hypothesis, utterly unjustified and gratuitous, because it amounts only to saying that outside myself nothing exists; strictly, therefore, it goes beyond the field of my experience.  But if it is introduced more modestly, as a refusal to leave the solid ground of experience, as a positive attempt not to make use of the concept of the Other, it is wholly logical, it remains at the level of critical positivism and—although it is in conflict with the most fundamental inclinations of our being—it draws its justification from the contradictions in the notion of others , as the idealist perspective regards it.  A psychology that aspires to be exact and objective—such as Watson’s “behaviorism” 3 —is ultimately only adopting solipsism as a working hypothesis.  This does not involve any denial, within the field of my experience, of the presence of objects that we might designate as “mental entities,” but only that a kind of ἐποχή be operated with respect to the existence of systems of representations organized by a subject, and situated outside my experience.  Confronted with this solution, Kant and the majority of post-Kantians continue to affirm the Other’s existence.  But, in order to justify their affirmation, they can appeal only to good sense, or to our deep inclinations.  As we know, Schopenhauer calls the solipsist “a madman locked up in an impregnable blockhouse.” 4 What an admission of helplessness.  The fact is that, by positing the Other’s existence, one is abruptly bursting apart the framework of idealism, and falling back into a metaphysical realism.  In the first place, by positing a plurality of closed systems that can communicate only through their outsides, we are implicitly reestablishing the notion of substance.  Of course these systems, since they are mere systems of representation, are non-substantial.  But their reciprocal externality is an in itself externality : it is, without being known; we do not even grasp its effects with certainty, since the solipsist’s hypothesis remains always possible.  We are confined to positing this in-itself nothingness as an absolute fact: rather than being relative to our knowledge of the Other, it is, on the contrary, what conditions that knowledge.  Therefore, even if consciousnesses are only pure conceptual connections of phenomena, even if the principle of their existence is the “ percipere ” and the “ percipi ,” it remains no less the case that the multiplicity of these relational systems is an in-itself multiplicity and that it transforms them immediately into in-itself systems.  But in addition, if I posit, as the correlative to my experience of the Other’s anger, a subjective experience of anger in another system, I am reinstating the system of the true image, which Kant took such pains to get rid of.  Of course, what we have here is a relation of concordance between two phenomena—the anger that is perceived in the movements and facial expressions, and the anger that is apprehended as a phenomenal reality of inner sense—and not a relation between a phenomenon and a thing in itself.  But it remains no less the case that the criterion of truth here is the conformity of thought to its object, and not the representations’ agreement with each other.  In fact, precisely because any recourse to the noumenon here is set aside, the phenomenon of the experienced anger is, in relation to that of the observed anger, like that of something real and objective to its image.  The problem really is the problem of adequate representation, since there is something real , and a mode of apprehension of this reality.  5 If it were a question of my own anger, I could regard its subjective manifestations and its physiological and objectively discernible manifestations as two series of effects of a single cause, without one of these series representing the anger’s truth or the reality , while the other represented only its effect or its image.  But if one of the series of phenomena resides in the Other, and the other in me, the first functions as the reality of the other, and the realist schema of truth is the only one that can apply here.  Thus we abandoned the realist way of posing the problem only because it necessarily led to idealism; we deliberately placed ourselves within the idealist perspective and have gained nothing from it because, conversely, to the extent that it rejects the solipsist hypothesis, it leads to a dogmatic and completely unjustified realism.  Let us see if we can understand this sudden inversion of the doctrines, and if we may be able to draw some instruction from this paradox, which may help us to pose the problem correctly.  At the origin of the problem of the Other’s existence there is a fundamental presupposition: that the Other is indeed the other , which is to say the me that is not me; here, therefore, we are apprehending a negation as a constitutive structure of Other-being.  The presupposition common to idealism and to realism is that the constituting negation is a negation of externality.  The Other is the one who is not me, and who I am not.  This not indicates a nothingness as a given element of separation between the Other and myself.  Between the Other and myself, there is a nothingness of separation.  The origin of this nothingness derives neither from me, nor from the Other, nor from a reciprocal relation between the Other and myself; rather, on the contrary, it is in its origin the foundation of any relation between the Other and myself, as the initial absence of any relation.  For the fact is that the occasion of the Other’s empirically appearing to me is the perception of a body, and this body is an in-itself external to my body; the relation that joins and separates these two bodies is spatial in type, as a relationship between things that are not related to each other, as pure externality insofar as it is given.  The realist who believes he apprehends the Other through his body considers therefore that he is separated from the Other as one body from another body, which means that the ontological meaning of the negation contained in the judgment “I am not Paul” is of the same type as that of the negation contained in the judgment “The table is not the chair.” In this way, as the separation of the consciousnesses is attributable to the bodies, there is something like an original space between the different consciousnesses, which is to say a nothingness that is, precisely, given , a distance that is absolute and passively undergone.  Of course, idealism reduces my body and the Other’s body to objective systems of representation.  For Schopenhauer, my body is nothing other than the “immediate object.” But we do not thereby eliminate the absolute distance between the consciousnesses.  As a complete system of representations—in other words, each monad—can be limited only by itself, it cannot maintain any relation with anything other than itself.  The knowing subject can neither limit nor become limited by another subject.  It is isolated through its positive plenitude and, in consequence, a spatial separation is preserved, as the very type of externality, between itself and another, similarly isolated, system.  In this way it is still space that implicitly separates my consciousness from that of the Other.  And, we ought also to add, the idealist resorts, without being aware of it, to a “third man” in order to get this external negation to appear.  For, as we have seen, every external relation, insofar as it is not constituted by its terms themselves, requires a witness to posit it.  Thus, for the idealist and for the realist, a conclusion is imposed: by virtue of the Other’s being revealed to us within a spatial world, there is a space—real or ideal—that separates us from the Other.  This presupposition brings in its wake a serious consequence: if in fact I am obliged to be, in relation to the Other, in the mode of indifferent externality, I will not be able to be any more affected in my being by the Other’s arising or by his abolition than an in-itself is by the appearing or disappearing of another in-itself.  In consequence, from the moment that the Other becomes unable to act on my being through his being, the only way in which he can be revealed to me is by appearing as an object to my knowledge.  But we must understand that as meaning that I have to constitute the Other as the unification imposed by my spontaneity on a diverse set of impressions, which means I am the one who constitutes the Other within the field of his experience.  The Other can only therefore be an image for me, even if, moreover, the entire theory of knowledge that I have constructed aims to reject this notion of the image; and only a witness who is external at the same time to myself and to the Other will be able to compare the image to the model, and to decide if it is true.  Moreover, for this witness to have authority, he must not in his turn stand in a relation of externality to me and to the Other; otherwise he would only be able to know us through images.  It would be necessary for him, within the ecstatic unity of his being, to be at one and the same time here , with me, as the internal negation of myself—and over there , with the Other, as the internal negation of the Other.  In this way, the recourse to God that we find in Leibniz is quite simply a recourse to an internal negation.  This is what the theological notion of creation conceals: God is, and at the same time is not, myself and the Other, since he creates us.  Indeed, it is fitting that he should be myself, in order to apprehend my reality without intermediary and in apodictic evidence, and that he should not be me, in order to retain his impartiality as a witness, and to be able to be, and to not be, over there, the Other.  The image of creation is the most adequate one here, because in the creative act I can see right to the depths of what I am creating—because what I am creating is me—and yet what I am creating is opposed to me, by closing in on itself in an affirmation of objectivity.  In this way, the spatializing presupposition does not leave us any choice: we must have recourse to God, or fall into a probabilistic position which leaves the door open for solipsism.  But this conception of a God who is his creatures lands us in a new difficulty: the one that is manifested by the problem of substances in post-Cartesian thought.  If God is me and if he is the Other, what will guarantee my own existence? If creation must be continuous , I remain constantly suspended between a distinct existence and a pantheistic fusion within the Creative Being.  If creation is an original act, and if I have closed in on myself against God, nothing any longer guarantees my existence to God, because he is no longer joined to me by anything but a relation of externality, like the sculptor to the completed statue, and henceforth he can know me only through images.  In these conditions, the notion of God, even while it reveals the negation of interiority as being the only possible connection between consciousnesses, makes all its insufficiency apparent: God is neither necessary nor sufficient as the guarantor of the Other’s existence; in addition, the existence of God as intermediary between me and the Other already supposes the presence, in a connection of interiority, of an Other to myself, since God, being endowed with the essential qualities of a Spirit, appears as the quintessence of the Other, and since he must be able to be in a connection of interiority with myself for a real foundation of the Other’s existence to have validity for me.  It seems therefore that a positive theory of the existence of the Other ought to be able to avoid solipsism and at the same time do without any recourse to God, if it envisages my original relation to the Other as a negation of interiority, i.e., as a negation that posits the original distinction of the Other and myself to exactly the extent to which it determines me by the Other, and determines the Other by me.  Can we consider the question from this perspective? III.  HUSSERL, HEGEL, HEIDEGGER The philosophy of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries appears to have understood that we cannot escape solipsism if we set out by conceiving myself and the Other in terms of two separate substances: indeed, we must take any union of these substances to be impossible.  For that reason, an examination of these modern theories reveals an attempt to apprehend, at the heart of any instance of consciousness, a fundamental and transcendent connection to the Other that is constitutive of each consciousness even as it arises.  But if we appear to have abandoned the premise of external negation, its essential consequence has been retained—in other words, the claim that my fundamental connection to the Other is brought about through knowledge .  Indeed, when Husserl concerns himself with refuting solipsism in the Cartesian Meditations and in Formal and Transcendental Logic , he believes that, by showing that the recourse to the Other is an indispensable condition of the constitution of a world, he has succeeded.  Without entering into the detail of the doctrine, we will confine ourselves to pointing out its mainspring: for Husserl, the world as it is revealed to consciousness is inter-monadic.  The Other is present within it not only as this concrete and empirical appearance but as a permanent condition of its unity and its richness.  Whether I consider—in solitude or in company—this table, or tree, or this section of the wall, the Other is always there as a layer of constitutive meanings that belong to the very object I am considering; he is there, in short, as the true guarantor of its objectivity.  And as my psychophysical self is contemporary with the world, forms part of the world, and falls, along with the world, within the scope of the phenomenological reduction, the Other appears as necessary even for the constitution of this self.  If I am to doubt the existence of my friend Pierre—or of others in general—insofar as this existence is by definition outside my experience, I will be obliged also to doubt my concrete being, my empirical reality as a teacher with this inclination, these habits, this character.  There is no privilege for my self: my empirical Ego and the Other’s empirical Ego appear within the world at the same time; and the meaning of “the Other” in general is just as necessary to the constitution of one of these “Egos” as it is to the other.  In this way, each object, rather than being constituted (as it is for Kant) by a mere relation to a subject , appears within my concrete experience as universal; it is given from the outset as possessing systems of references to an indefinite plurality of consciousnesses; the Other is disclosed to me with the table, with the wall—as a constant referent of the object in question—just as much as he is on the occasion of particular appearances of Pierre or of Paul.  Of course, in relation to the classical doctrines, these views amount to progress.  It is incontestable that the implement-thing refers us, from the moment it is disclosed, to a plurality of for-itselfs.  We will return to this.  It is evident too that the meaning of “the Other” cannot come from experience, or from an argument from analogy made on the occasion of experience: rather, and quite to the contrary, it is in the light of the concept of the Other that experience is interpreted.  Does that mean that the concept of the Other is a priori ? We will try, in what follows, to determine this.  But, despite these incontestable advantages, Husserl’s theory does not seem to be markedly different from Kant’s.  The point is that, if my empirical Ego is no more sure than the Other’s, Husserl has retained the transcendental subject, which is radically distinct from it, and which is extremely similar to the Kantian subject.  Now, what needs to be demonstrated is not the parallelism between the empirical “Egos,” which nobody is calling into doubt, but the parallelism between the transcendental subjects.  In fact, the Other is never the empirical character whom I encounter in my experience: he is the transcendental subject to whom this character refers by his very nature.  Thus the real problem is that of the connection of transcendental subjects beyond experience.  If the reply to this is that the transcendental subject refers from the outset to other subjects, in order to constitute the noematic totality, we can easily respond by saying that it is as meanings that it refers to them.  Here the Other will be like an additional category, which allows a world to be constituted, and not a real being, existing beyond that world.  And, doubtless, the “category” of the Other implies, in its very meaning, a reference from the other side of the world to a subject, but this reference can only be hypothetical, and its value is purely that of the content of a unifying concept; its validity is within and for the world, its authority is limited to the world, and the Other is by his nature outside the world.  Moreover, Husserl has deprived himself even of the possibility of understanding what the Other’s extraworldly being could mean, since he defines being as the mere indication of an infinite series of operations to be effected.  There could be no better way of making knowledge the measure of being.  Now, even if we allow that knowledge is generally the measure of being, the Other’s being is measured in its reality through the knowledge that the Other has of himself, and not through the knowledge I gain of him.  What needs to be reached by me is the Other, not insofar as I acquire knowledge of him but insofar as he acquires knowledge of himself, which is impossible: that would actually imply an identification of my interiority with the Other’s.  What we come back to here, therefore, is that distinction in principle between the Other and myself, which is derived not from the externality of our bodies but from the simple fact that each of us exists as interiority, and that a legitimate knowledge of interiority can be gained only within interiority, which rules out as a matter of principle any knowledge of the Other as he knows himself, i.e., as he is.  Husserl understood this, moreover, since he defines “the Other” as he is disclosed to our concrete experience as an absence .  But how—at least in Husserl’s philosophy—can there be a full intuition of an absence? The Other is the object of empty intentions; the Other denies himself to us as a matter of principle and flees.  The only reality that therefore remains is that of my intention: the Other, to the extent that he appears concretely within my experience, is the empty noema that corresponds to my aiming toward the Other; to the extent to which he appears as a transcendental concept, he is a set of operations in the unification and constitution of my experience.  Husserl replies to the solipsist that the Other’s existence is just as certain as the existence of the world, including my psychophysical existence within the world; but the solipsist does not disagree—“It is just as certain,” he will say, “but not more.” The world’s existence, he will add, is measured by the knowledge I have of it; it cannot be otherwise for the Other’s existence.  I once believed that I could escape solipsism by denying Husserl the existence of his transcendental “Ego.” 6 At the time it seemed to me that, since I was emptying it of its subject, nothing would be left in my consciousness that could be privileged in relation to the Other.  But in fact, even though I remain persuaded that the hypothesis of the transcendental subject is useless and harmful, abandoning it does not advance the question of the Other’s existence by a single step.  Even if, outside the empirical Ego, there was nothing other than the consciousness of that Ego—that is, a transcendental field without a subject—it would remain no less true that my assertion of the Other postulates and demands the existence, beyond the world, of a similar transcendental field and in consequence that, here too, the only way of escaping solipsism will be by proving that my transcendental consciousness is, in its very being, affected by the extraworldly existence of other consciousnesses of the same type.  Thus, by having reduced being to a series of meanings, the only connection that Husserl was able to establish between my being and the Other’s is that of knowledge ; he cannot therefore, any more than Kant could, escape solipsism.  If, without observing the rules of chronological succession, we follow those of a kind of timeless dialectic, the solution that Hegel provides to the problem—in the first volume of the Phenomenology of Spirit —may seem to us to show significant progress in relation to that proposed by Husserl.  Now it is no longer for the constitution of the world and of my empirical “ego” that the Other’s appearing is indispensable but for my consciousness’s existence itself, as self-consciousness.  As self-consciousness, in fact, the Ego intuits itself.  The equivalence of “Ego = Ego” or “I = I” is just what expresses this fact.  In the first place, this self-consciousness is a pure identity with itself, pure existence for itself.  It has certainty of itself, but this certainty still lacks truth.  In point of fact, this certainty could be true only to the extent to which its own existence for itself could appear to it as an independent object.  In this way, self-consciousness at first takes the form of a syncretic relation, without truth, between a subject and an object that has not yet been objectified, which is that subject itself.  As it is impelled to actualize its concept by becoming conscious of itself in every respect, it aims to make itself valid externally, by endowing itself with objectivity and manifest existence: it is a matter of explicating the “I am I” and producing itself as an object, in order to attain the final stage of the development—a stage that is, naturally, in another sense, the first motor of consciousness’s becoming—which is the general self-consciousness that recognizes itself in other self-consciousnesses and which is identical with them, and with itself.  The intermediary is the other .  The other appears with myself, since self-consciousness is identical with itself through the exclusion of every other.  Thus the primary fact is the plurality of consciousnesses, and this plurality is actualized in the form of a double and reciprocal relation of exclusion.  Here we are in the presence of that link of internal negation which we demanded earlier.  No external or in itself nothingness separates my consciousness from the Other’s consciousness; rather, it is through the very fact of being me that I exclude the other: the other excludes me by being himself, and he is what I exclude by being me.  Each consciousness bears directly on the other, in a reciprocal imbrication of their being.  This enables us, at the same time, to determine the way in which the other appears to me: he is what is other than me; therefore he is given as an inessential object, with a character of negativity.  But this other is also a self-consciousness.  As such he appears to me as an ordinary object, immersed in the being of life.  And, equally, that is how I appear to the other: as a concrete, sensuous and immediate existence.  Here the terrain occupied by Hegel is not that of the univocal relation from me (as apprehended through the cogito ) to the other but that of the reciprocal relation that he defines as the “beholding of oneself in another.” 7 Indeed, it is only insofar as each one is opposed to the other that he can be absolutely for itself; each one affirms against the other, and in relation to the other, his right to be as an individual.  Thus the cogito itself cannot be a point of departure for philosophy; in fact it can arise only as a consequence of my appearing for myself in the form of individuality, and this appearing is conditioned by the other’s recognition.  It is not at all on the basis of the cogito that the problem of the other arises; on the contrary, it is the other’s existence that makes the cogito possible as the abstract moment in which the ego apprehends itself as an object.  In this way the “moment” that Hegel calls “being for the other” is a necessary stage in the development of self-consciousness; the path of internality passes through the other.  But the other is of interest to me only to the extent to which he is another Ego, an Ego-object for my Ego, and, conversely, to the extent to which he reflects my Ego, i.e., insofar as I am an object for him.  Through the necessity that means I can be an object for myself only over there, within the other, I am obliged to obtain the recognition of my being from the other.  But if my consciousness for itself has to be mediated in relation to itself through another consciousness, its being-for-itself—and in consequence its being in general—depends on the other.  As I appear to the other, so I am.  In addition, since the other is as he appears to me and since my being depends on the other, the way in which I appear to myself—i.e., the moment in which my consciousness of myself develops—depends on the way in which the other appears to me.  The value of the other’s recognition of me depends on the value of the recognition by me of the other.  In this sense, to the extent to which the other intuits me as bound to a body and immersed in life, I am myself only an other .  In order to make the other recognize me, I have to risk my own life.  To risk one’s life, in fact, is to show oneself as not being bound to the objective form, or to any determinate existence.  But at the same time I pursue the other’s death .  In other words, I want to become mediated by another who must be only other—i.e., by a dependent consciousness whose essential character is that of existing only for another.  That will be brought about in the very moment in which I risk my life because, in the struggle against the other, I have abstracted from my sensuous being by risking it; the other, on the contrary, prefers life to freedom, thereby showing that he has not been able to posit himself as not being bound to the objective form.  He remains therefore bound to external things in general; he appears to me and appears to himself as inessential .  He is the Slave and I am the Master ; for him, I am the one who is the essence.  In this way the famous “Master-Slave” relation appears, which was to influence Marx so profoundly.  We do not need to enter into its details.  It will suffice for us to note that the Slave is the Master’s truth, but this unilateral and unequal recognition is insufficient, because the truth of his self-certainty is, for the Master, an inessential consciousness; he is not therefore certain of being for itself as truth .  For this truth to be attained, what is required is a “moment in which what the master does to the other he also does to himself, and what the slave does to himself he also does to the other.” 8 At this moment the general self-consciousness will appear, which recognizes itself in other self-consciousnesses and is identical to them and to itself.  Thus Hegel’s brilliant intuition here is to make me depend on the other in my being .  I am, he says, a being for itself which is only for itself through an other.  It is therefore in my heart that the Other penetrates me.  I cannot put him in doubt without doubting myself, since “self-consciousness is… only real insofar as it knows its echo (and reflection) in another.” 9 And as doubt itself implies a consciousness that exists for itself, the Other’s existence conditions my attempt at doubting it, to the same degree that, for Descartes, my existence conditions methodical doubt.  In this way, solipsism appears to be decisively taken out of action.  By moving from Husserl to Hegel we have made enormous progress: first, the negation that constitutes the Other is direct, internal, and reciprocal; next, it takes on and bites into each consciousness in the very depths of its being; the problem is posed at the level of inner being, that of the universal and transcendental I; it is in my essential being that I depend on the Other’s essential being, and my being for myself does not need to be opposed to my being for the Other; far from it, being-for-the-Other appears as a necessary condition of my being for myself.  And yet, despite its scope, despite the rich and deep insights at the level of detail with which the theory of the Master and Slave is teeming, can we be satisfied by it? To be sure, Hegel has raised the question of the being of consciousnesses.  What he examines is being-for-itself and being-for-the-Other, and he presents each consciousness as including the other’s reality .  But it is no less clear that this ontological problem remains formulated throughout in terms of knowledge.  The mainspring of the struggle of consciousnesses is the attempt each of them makes to transform its self-certainty into truth.  And we know that this truth can be attained only insofar as my consciousness becomes an object for the other, at the same time as the other becomes an object for mine.  Thus Hegel replies to the question raised by idealism—how is the other able to be an object for me?—by remaining on idealism’s own territory: if there is an Ego in truth for whom the other is an object, that is because there is an other for whom the Ego is an object.  Here the measure of being is still knowledge, and Hegel does not even conceive that there might be a being-for-the-Other that was not ultimately reducible to an “object-being.” Therefore the universal self-consciousness that tries to emerge through all of these dialectical stages is, by his own admission, tantamount to a pure empty form: the “I am I.” “This proposition of Self-Consciousness,” he writes, “is devoid of all contents.” 10 And elsewhere: “It is the movement of absolute abstraction which consists in sublating all immediate existence and which leads to the purely negative being of self-identical consciousness.” 11 Universal self-consciousness, itself the final term of this dialectical conflict, has not become enriched in the midst of its transformations: on the contrary, it has been entirely stripped bare; it is nothing more than “I know that another knows me as myself.” Doubtless that is because, for absolute idealism, being and knowledge are identical.  But where will this assimilation lead us? In the first place, this “I am I”—a pure universal formula of identity—has nothing in common with the concrete consciousness we tried to describe in our Introduction.  We established there that the being of consciousness (of) self could not be defined in terms of knowledge.  Knowledge begins with reflection , but the reflection-reflecting play is not a subject-object dyad, not even implicitly, and it does not depend in its being on any transcendent consciousness; rather, its mode of being is precisely to be in question for itself.  Then we showed, in Chapter 1 of Part Two, that the relation of the reflection to the reflecting was in no way a relation of identity, and could not be reduced to Hegel’s “Ego = Ego” or “I am I.” The reflection produces itself as not being the reflection; what we have here is a being that nihilates itself in its being, and which tries in vain to merge into itself as itself .  If it is true that this description is the only one that allows us to understand the original fact of consciousness, we will judge Hegel as having failed to take account of that abstract duplication of the Ego which he presents as the equivalent of self-consciousness.  Finally, we succeeded in ridding the pure unreflected consciousness of the transcendental I that was obscuring it, and we showed that ipseity— the foundation of personal existence—was entirely different from an Ego, or an Ego’s reference to itself.  Therefore there could be no question of defining consciousness in terms of transcendental egology.  In brief, consciousness is a concrete and sui generis being, not an abstract and unjustifiable relation of identity; it is ipseity, and not the site of an opaque and pointless Ego; its being allows transcendental reflection to reach it and there is a truth of consciousness that does not depend on the Other, but consciousness’s very being , as independent of knowledge, preexists its truth.  In this domain, as in naïve realism, it is being that is the measure of truth, because the truth of a reflective intuition is measured by its conformity to being: consciousness was there before being known.  If therefore consciousness affirms itself in the face of the Other, it is because it lays claim to the recognition of its being, and not of an abstract truth.  It is difficult to conceive, in fact, that the ardent and perilous struggle of the master and the slave could have as its only outcome the recognition of so impoverished and abstract a formulation as “I am I.” Moreover that struggle itself would involve a deception, since the end that was finally attained would be universal self-consciousness, the “intuition of the self existing through the self.” Here, as everywhere, we need to oppose Hegel with Kierkegaard, who represents the claims of the individual as such.  What the individual claims is his achievement as an individual, the recognition of his concrete being and not the objective explication of a universal structure.  Doubtless the rights that I claim from the Other posit the universality of the self  soi ; the respectability of persons demands the recognition of my person as universal.  But it is my concrete and individual being that takes shape within this universal and fulfills it, and the rights that I claim are for that being- there : here, the particular supports and founds the universal; in this case, the universal can have no meaning unless it exists for the purpose of the individual.  Here again, this assimilation of being to knowledge will result in a large number of errors or impossibilities.  We will summarize them here under two headings .  In other words, we will level against Hegel a twofold accusation of optimism.  In the first place, it seems to us that Hegel sins through his epistemological optimism.  Indeed it seems to him that it is possible for the truth of self-consciousness to appear, which is to say that an objective agreement can be achieved between consciousnesses under the so-called recognition of me by the Other and of the Other by me.  This recognition can be simultaneous and reciprocal: “I know that the Other knows me as myself”—it produces the universality of self-consciousness in truth .  But the correct formulation of the problem of the Other makes this transition to the universal impossible.  If in point of fact the Other is to return my “self” to me, it is necessary, at least at the end of the dialectical evolution, that there should be a commensurability between what I am for him, what he is for me, what I am for myself, and what he is for himself.  Of course, this homogeneity does not exist at the outset, as Hegel agrees: the Master-Slave relation is not reciprocal.  But he claims that it must be possible for reciprocity to be established.  In effect, what happens is that at the beginning he introduces a confusion—so deft that it appears to be voluntary—between objecthood and life .  The other, he says, appears to me as an object.  Now, this object is Me within the other.  And when Hegel wants to give a better definition of this objecthood, he discerns three elements within it: This apprehension of oneself in the other is: 1.  the abstract moment of self-sameness.  2.  But each has also the determination of appearing to the other as an external object, and, insofar as an immediate, sensuous, and concrete existence.  3.  Each exists absolutely for itself and as an individual insofar as opposed to the other.  12 We can see that the abstract moment of self-identity is given in the knowledge of the other.  It is given along with two other moments of the total structure.  But the curious thing in a philosopher of Synthesis is that Hegel did not ask himself whether these three elements might not each react against the other in such a way as to constitute a new form, which would be resistant to analysis.  He clarifies his point of view in Phenomenology of Spirit by asserting that the other appears at first as inessential (that is the point of the third moment, quoted above) and as a “consciousness immersed in the being of life.” But this is a matter of pure coexistence between the abstract moment and life .  It suffices therefore for me or the other to risk our life for us to bring about, in the very act of offering ourselves to danger, an analytical separation between life and consciousness: What the other is for consciousness, each one is itself for the other; each in its own self through its own activity, and through the activity of the other, achieves this pure abstraction of being for itself.… To present itself as the pure abstraction of self-consciousness consists in showing itself as the pure negation of its objective form, in showing that it is not bound to any specific existence… in showing that it is not bound to life.  13 And of course Hegel will say later on that, through the experience of risk, and of the danger of death, self-consciousness learns that life is as essential to it as pure self-consciousness; but that is from another point of view, and it remains no less the case that I can always separate, in the other, the pure truth of self-consciousness from its life .  In this way the slave apprehends the master’s self-consciousness; he is its truth even while, as we have seen, this truth is not yet adequate.  But does it amount to the same thing to say that the Other appears to me as a matter of principle as an object, or to say that he appears to me as bound to some particular existence, as immersed in life ? If at this point we stay at the level of pure logical hypotheses, we will observe right at the start that it is quite possible for the Other to be given to a consciousness in the form of an object, without that object being specifically bound to that contingent object which we know as a living body.  In fact our experience only presents us with conscious and living individuals, but as a matter of principle we need to take note that the Other is an object for me because he is the Other, and not because he appears on the occasion of a body-object: otherwise we would fall back into the spatializing illusion that we discussed earlier.  In this way, what is essential to the Other as Other is objectivity, and not life.  Moreover, Hegel started out from that logical observation.  But if it is true that the connection of a consciousness to life does not deform the “abstract moment of self-consciousness” in its nature, which remains there, immersed, and always liable to be discovered, does the same thing apply to objectivity? In other words, since we know that a consciousness is before being known, isn’t a known consciousness completely modified just by virtue of being known? Does a consciousness that appears as an object for a consciousness continue to be a consciousness? It is easy to answer this question: the being of self-consciousness is such that in its being its being is in question; therefore, it is pure interiority.  It constantly refers to an itself that it has to be.  Its being is defined by this: that it is this being in the mode of being what it is not, and of not being what it is.  Its being is, therefore, a radical exclusion of all objectivity: I am the one who cannot be an object for myself, and who cannot even conceive for himself of existence in the form of an object (other than at the level of the reflective splitting into two—but we saw that reflection is the drama of the being who cannot be an object for himself).  And this is not because of any lack of distance, or an intellectual preclusion, or a limit that is imposed on my knowledge but because objectivity demands an explicit negation: the object is what I make myself not be, whereas what I am, myself, is the one who I make myself be.  I am myself everywhere, I cannot escape myself, I reapprehend myself from behind, and even if I could attempt to make myself an object, I would already be myself, at the heart of this object that I am, and from the very center of that object I would have to be the subject who was looking at it.  That is, moreover, what Hegel foresaw when he said that the Other’s existence is necessary for me to be an object for myself.  But by postulating that self-consciousness expresses itself through the “I is I”—i.e., by assimilating it to self-knowledge—he missed the consequences to be drawn from these first observations, since he introduced into consciousness itself something like an object in potentiality which the Other would need only to draw out, without modifying it.  But if to be an object is precisely to-not-be-myself , the fact of being an object for a consciousness radically modifies consciousness, not in what it is for itself but in its appearing to the Other.  The Other’s consciousness is that which I am able merely to contemplate and which therefore appears to me as purely given, rather than being that which has myself to be.  It is something that is delivered to me within universal time—i.e., in the original dispersion of moments—rather than appearing to me within the unity of its own temporalization.  For the only consciousness that can appear to me in its own temporalization is mine , and it can do that only by renouncing all objectivity.  In brief, the for-itself is unknowable as for-itself by the Other.  The object that I apprehend by the name “Other” appears to me in a form that is radically other : the Other is not for himself as he appears to me; I do not appear to myself as I am for the Other ; I am no more able to apprehend myself for myself as I am for the Other than I am able to apprehend what the Other is for himself on the basis of the Other-object which appears to me.  How therefore could we establish a universal concept that subsumes, under “self-consciousness,” my consciousness for myself and (of) myself and my knowledge of the Other? But that is not all: according to Hegel, the other is an object and I apprehend myself as an object in the other.  Now, one of these claims destroys the other: for it to be possible for me to appear to myself as an object in the other, I would have to apprehend the other as a subject, i.e., to apprehend him in his interiority.  But insofar as the other appears to me as an object, my objectivity for him cannot appear to me: of course I can apprehend that the other-object relates himself to me through intentions and actions but, just because he is an object, the Other-mirror becomes obscure and no longer reflects anything because these intentions and these actions are things in the world, apprehended in World-Time, observed and contemplated, and whose meaning is an object for me.  Thus I am able to appear to myself only as a transcendent quality to which the Other’s actions and intentions refer but, precisely, as the Other’s objectivity destroys my objectivity for him, it is as an internal subject that I apprehend myself, as that to which these intentions and these acts relate.  And we must be careful to understand this apprehension of myself by myself purely in terms of consciousness and not of knowledge: in having to be what I am in the form of an ecstatic consciousness (of) myself, I apprehend the Other as an object that indicates me.  In this way Hegel’s optimism ends in failure: between the Other-object and me-subject there is no commensurability, any more than between my consciousness (of) self and my consciousness of the other.  I cannot know myself in the Other if the Other is at first an object for me, nor can I apprehend the Other in his true being, i.e., in his subjectivity.  No universal knowledge can be derived from the relation of consciousnesses.  Let us describe that as their ontological separation.  But there is another, more fundamental form of optimism in Hegel, which we may suitably call his ontological optimism.  For him, the truth is in effect the truth of the Whole.  14 And, in order to consider the problem of the other, he locates himself in the perspective of truth, i.e., of the Whole.  In this way, when Hegel’s monism considers the relation of consciousnesses, it does not locate itself within any particular consciousness.  Even though the Whole is to be actualized, it is already there as the truth of all that is true.  When Hegel writes, therefore, that every consciousness, being identical with itself, is other than the other, he has established himself within the whole, outside the consciousnesses, and is considering them from the point of view of the Absolute.  For the consciousness es 15 are moments of the whole, moments that are, by themselves, “ unselbstständig ,” and the whole is what mediates between the consciousnesses.  This generates an ontological optimism parallel to the epistemological optimism; the plurality can and must be sublated toward the totality.  But, if Hegel can affirm the reality of this sublation, it is because he has already given it to himself from the outset.  In fact, he has forgotten his own consciousness; he is the Whole and, in this respect, if he resolves the problem of the consciousness es so easily, that is because the question never posed a genuine problem for him.  In fact, he does not raise the question of the relations between his own consciousness and the Other’s but, abstracting entirely from his own, he investigates purely and simply the relationship between Others’ consciousnesses, i.e., the relationship between consciousnesses that are already objects for him and whose nature, according to him, is precisely to be a specific type of object (the subject-object) and which, from the totalizing standpoint at which he places himself, are strictly equivalent to each other, without any one of them being separated from the others by some particular prerogative.  But if Hegel forgets himself, we cannot forget Hegel and so we are directed back to the cogito .  If in fact, as we have established, the being of my consciousness is strictly irreducible to knowledge, then I cannot transcend my being toward a reciprocal and universal relation from which I could see, at the same time, my being and the being of others as equivalents.  On the contrary, I must establish myself in my being , and raise the problem of the Other on the basis of my being.  In brief, the only reliable point of departure is the interiority of the cogito .  And we must take this to mean that each person must be able, by setting out from his own interiority, to find the Other’s being as a transcendence that conditions the very being of this interiority, which necessarily implies that the multiplicity of consciousnesses cannot as a matter of principle be surpassed, because, while I can, of course, transcend myself toward a Whole, I cannot establish myself within that Whole in order to contemplate myself and to contemplate the Other.  No logical or epistemological optimism is able to end the scandal of the plurality of consciousnesses.  If Hegel believed that it could, that is because he never grasped the nature of that peculiar dimension of being, consciousness (of) self.  The task that an ontology can set itself is to describe this scandal and to found it in the very nature of being: it lacks the power, however, to surpass it.  It is possible—and this will become clearer soon—that we can refute solipsism and show that the Other’s existence is evident for us and certain.  But even if we were to make the Other’s existence participate in the apodictic certainty of the cogito —i.e., of my own existence—we would not for all that have “surpassed” the Other toward some inter-monadic totality.  The dispersion and struggle of consciousnesses will remain what they are: we will have simply discovered their foundation, and their true domain.  What have we gained from this lengthy critique? Simply this: if it must be possible to refute solipsism, my relation to the Other is, first and fundamentally, a relation of being to being, and not of knowledge to knowledge.  Indeed, we have seen the failure of Husserl, who, on this particular front, measures being by knowledge, and the failure of Hegel, who identifies knowledge and being.  But, equally, we have recognized that Hegel, even though his vision was clouded by the postulate of absolute idealism, saw how to locate the debate at its true level.  It seems that Heidegger, in Being and Time , has profited from the meditations of his precursors and has profoundly absorbed this twofold necessity: (1) the relation of “human-realities” must be a relation of being; (2) this relation must make “human-realities” depend on each other in their essential being.  At least his theory is a response to these two requirements.  With his brusque and slightly barbaric way of cutting through Gordian knots—rather than trying to untie them—Heidegger answers the question he has raised with a pure and simple definition .  He has discovered various moments (which are, moreover, inseparable, other than by abstraction) within the “being-in-the-world” that characterizes human-reality.  These moments are “world,” “being-in” and “being.” He described the world as “that through which human-reality becomes acquainted with what it is”; “being-in” was defined by him as “ Befindlichkeit ” and “ Verstand ”; 16 what remains to be talked about is being , i.e., the mode in which human-reality is its being-in-the-world.  That, he tells us, is “ Mit-Sein ,” i.e., “being-with.…” Thus the characteristic of human-reality’s being is that it is its being with others.  This is not a matter of chance: I do not exist first , such that subsequently some contingency makes me encounter the Other; what is in question here is an essential structure of my being.  But this structure is not established from outside and from a totalizing point of view, as it is in Hegel.  To be sure, Heidegger does not set out from the cogito , in the Cartesian sense of the self-discovery of consciousness; instead, the human-reality that is disclosed to him, and whose structures he seeks to determine through concepts, is his own.  “ Dasein ist je meines ,” 17 he writes.  It is by explicating my own preontological understanding of myself that I grasp being-with-the-Other as an essential characteristic of my being.  In short, I discover the transcendent relation to the Other as constituting my own being, just as I discovered being-in-the-world to be the measure of my human-reality.  Thereafter the problem of the Other is only a pseudo-problem: the Other is no longer first some particular existence that I encounter in the world (and who cannot be indispensable to my own existence, since I existed before I encountered him); he is the ex-centric term that contributes to the constitution of my being.  The examination of my being, insofar as I am thrown by it out of myself, toward structures which at the same time escape me and define me—this examination is what originally discloses the Other to me.  Let us note, in addition, that the type of connection to the Other has changed: with realism, idealism, Husserl, and Hegel, the type of relation between consciousnesses was being-for : the Other appeared to me, and even constituted me, insofar as he was for me, or I was for him; the problem was the mutual recognition of consciousnesses placed before each other, each of which appeared to the others within the world and confronting each other.  Being-with has an entirely different meaning: with does not designate the reciprocal relation of recognition and of struggle that might result from the appearance in the midst of the world of a human-reality other than mine.  Rather, it expresses a kind of ontological solidarity for the exploitation of this world.  The other is not originally connected to me as an ontic reality, appearing in the midst of the world, among “implements,” as a particular type of object: in that case, he would already be degraded and the relation that might join him to me could never become reciprocal.  The other is not an object .  He remains, in his connection to me, a human-reality; the being through which he determines me in my being is his pure being, apprehended as “being-in-the-world”—and we know that “in” has to be understood in the sense of “ colo ,” “ habito ,” and not in the sense of “ insum ”; 18 to-be-in-the-world is to haunt the world, not to be glued down within it—and it is in my “being-in-the-world” that he determines me.  Our relation is not a frontal opposition; rather, it is an interdependence alongside : insofar as I make it the case that a world exists as a structure of equipment, of which I make use for the purposes of my human-reality, I come to be determined in my being by a being who makes it the case that the same world exists as a structure of equipment for the purposes of his reality.  And, moreover, we must not understand this being-with as a pure collaterality, passively received by my being.  To be, for Heidegger, is to be one’s own possibilities, to make oneself be.  What I make myself be is, therefore, a mode of being.  And this truth means even that I am responsible for my being for the Other insofar as I actualize it freely, in authenticity or inauthenticity.  It is as wholly free and through an original choice that, for example, I actualize my being-with in the form of the “they.” 19 And if we are asked how my being-with can exist for-me, the reply should be that I become acquainted through the world with what I am.  In particular, when I am in the mode of inauthenticity—of the “they”—the world sends back to me something like an impersonal reflection of my inauthentic possibilities in the guise of implements and structures of equipment that belong to “everyone,” and which belong to me insofar as I am “everyone:” ready-made clothes, public transport, parks, gardens, public places, shelters that are built so that anyone can shelter there, etc.  In this way I become acquainted with myself as anyone by the referential structure of equipment, which refers to me as a “ Worumwillen ,” 20 and the inauthentic state—which is my ordinary state for as long as I have not effected any conversion to authenticity—reveals my being-with to me, not as the relation of one unique personality with other equally unique personalities, not as the mutual connection between the “most irreplaceable of beings,” 21 but as a complete interchangeability in the terms of the relation.  The terms still lack determinacy: I am not opposed to the other, because I am not me; we have the social unity of the “they.” To raise the problem at the level of the incommunicability of individual subjects was to commit a ὕστερον πρότερον, 22 to turn the world on its head.  Authenticity and individuality have to be won: I will be my own authenticity only if, under the influence of the call of conscience ( Ruf des Gewissens ), I throw myself toward death, as toward my ownmost possibility, with resolute-decision ( Entschlossenheit ).  At that moment I am disclosed to myself in authenticity, and I raise others, too, along with me, in the direction of authenticity.  The empirical image that symbolizes Heidegger’s intuition best is not that of the struggle; it is the image of the team .  The other’s original relation with my consciousness is not the you and me , it is the we , and Heidegger’s being-with is not the clear and distinct positing of one individual confronting another, it is not knowledge ; it is the muted existence of the team-member in common with his team, that existence of which the rhythm of the oars or the regular movements of the cox will make the oarsmen aware, and which will be manifested to them by their common goal to be attained, the boat or the skiff to be overtaken, and the entire world (spectators, the performance, etc.) outlined at the horizon.  It is against the common ground of this coexistence that I will stand out through the sudden disclosure of my being-toward-death, within an absolute “solitude in common,” while at the same time I elevate the others, right up to this solitude.  This time we have really been given what we were asking for: a being that implies the Other’s being in its being.  And yet we cannot consider ourselves satisfied.  First of all, Heidegger’s theory offers us more of an indication of the solution to be found, rather than that solution itself.  Even if we were to admit without reservation this substitution of “being-with” for “being-for,” it would remain for us a mere assertion without foundation.  Doubtless we encounter certain empirical states of our being—in particular, what the Germans denote by their untranslatable term Stimmung 23 —that seem to reveal a coexistence of consciousnesses rather than a relation of opposition.  But this coexistence is precisely what needs to be explained.  Why does it become the unique foundation of our being, why is it the fundamental type of our relation with others, and why did Heidegger believe he was entitled to pass from this empirical and ontic observation of being-with to posit coexistence as the ontological structure of my “being-in-the-world?” And which kind of being has this coexistence? To what extent has the negation that makes of the Other an other , and constitutes him as inessential, been maintained? If we eliminate it entirely, will we not fall into monism? And if we have to preserve it as an essential structure of our relation to the Other, what modification will it be necessary for it to undergo, for it to lose the character of opposition that it had in being-for-the-Other and for it to acquire this character of a binding connection that is the very structure of being-with? And how do we move from that to some concrete experience of the Other within the world (as when I see from my window a passerby walking down the street)? Of course it is tempting to conceive of myself as delineating myself—through the impulse of my freedom, through the choice of my unique possibilities—against the undifferentiated ground of the human; and perhaps this conception contains a substantial part of the truth.  But, at least in this form, it raises considerable objections.  In the first place, the ontological point of view converges here with the abstract point of view of the Kantian subject.  To say that through its ontological structure the human-reality—even if it is my human-reality—‘is-with,” is to say that it is-with by its nature, i.e., essentially and universally.  Even if that claim were proved, it would not enable us to explain concrete being-with ; in other words, the ontological coexistence that appears as the structure of my “being-in-the-world” cannot in any way serve as the foundation of an ontic being-with such as, for example, the coexistence that appears in my friendship with Pierre or in the couple that I form with Anny.  What would need to be shown, in fact, is that “being-with-Pierre” or “being-with-Anny” is a constitutive structure of my concrete-being.  But that is impossible, from the standpoint that Heidegger has taken up.  In point of fact, viewed at the ontological level, the other in the “with” relation cannot be any more concretely determined than the human-reality that is directly in view and of which he is the alter ego; it is an abstract term and thereby unselbstständig , and does not at all have within it the power to become this other, Pierre or Anny.  Thus, the “ Mitsein ” relation cannot help us at all to resolve the psychological and concrete problem of our recognition of the Other.  There are two incommunicable planes and two problems, which demand separate solutions.  That, we will be told, is only one aspect of the difficulty that Heidegger experiences generally, in passing from the ontological level to the ontic level, from “being-in-the-world” in general to my relation with this particular implement, from my being-toward-death—which makes my death into my most essential possibility—to this “ontic” death that I will have through my encounter with this or that external existent.  But in all other cases this difficulty can just about be concealed, since, for example, it is human-reality that makes it the case that a world exists where a threat of death which concerns it can be hidden: better still, if the world is, it is because it is “mortal,” in the sense in which we say that a wound is “mortal.” But, in the context of the problem of the Other, the impossibility of passing from one level to the other explodes.  For if, indeed, through the ecstatic arising of its being-in-the-world, human-reality makes it the case that a world exists, we cannot say, in the same way, that its being-with makes another human-reality arise.  Of course, I am the being through whom “there is” ( es gibt ) being.  Might it be said that I am the being through whom “there is” another human-reality? If we take that to mean that I am the being for whom there is another human-reality for me , that is a straightforward truism.  If we mean that I am the being through whom there are others in general, we fall back into solipsism.  In point of fact, this human-reality “with whom” I am is itself “in-the-world-with-me”; it is the free founding of a world (How does it come about that it is mine ? From being-with , we cannot infer the identity of the worlds “in which” the human-realities are), and it is its own possibilities.  This human-reality is therefore for itself , without waiting for me to make its being exist in the form of “there is.” In this way, I may constitute a world as “mortal,” but not a human-reality as a concrete being that is its own possibilities.  My being-with , apprehended on the basis of “my” being, can be regarded only as a pure demand, founded in my being, and which does not constitute the least proof of the Other’s existence, the least bridge between me and the other.  Better still, far from facilitating a specific and ontic relation from me to Pierre, this ontological relation from me to an abstract Other—by virtue of the very fact that it defines my relation in general to the Other—makes any concrete connection between my being and a particular Other given in my experience radically impossible.  If in fact my relation with the Other is a priori , it exhausts any possibility of a relation with the Other.  Empirical and contingent relations will not be able to be specifications, or particular cases, of it: a law can have specifications in only two circumstances; either the law is inductively derived from empirical and particular facts, and that is not the case here; or else it is a priori and unifies experience, like Kantian concepts.  But in that case, precisely, its scope is only within the limits of experience: I find in things only what I have put into them.  Now, the establishment of a relation between two concrete “beings-in-the-world” cannot belong to my experience; it escapes therefore the domain of being-with .  But, precisely because the law constitutes its own domain, it excludes a priori any real fact that it has not constructed.  A time that existed as the a priori form of my sensibility would exclude me a priori from any connection with a noumenal time that possessed the characteristics of a being.  In this way the existence of a being-with that is ontological and, in consequence, a priori renders any ontic connection with a concrete human-reality, arising for-itself as an absolute transcendence, impossible.  Being-with , conceived as a structure of my being, isolates me as inexorably as the arguments for solipsism.  The fact is that Heidegger’s transcendence is a concept in bad faith: of course it aims to move beyond idealism and, to the extent to which the latter presents us with a subjectivity at rest in itself, contemplating its own images, it manages to do that.  But the idealism that is hereby left behind is only an adulterated form of idealism, a kind of empirico-critical psychologism.  Without doubt Heidegger’s human-reality “exists outside itself.” But, in Heidegger’s doctrine, it is precisely this existence outside itself that defines the self .  It bears no resemblance to Plato’s ek-stasis, in which existence is really an alienation, an existence in an other, 24 or to Malebranche’s vision in God, 25 or to our own conception of ecstasis and internal negation.  Heidegger does not escape idealism: his flight from oneself, as an a priori structure of one’s being, is no less isolating than Kant’s reflection on the a priori conditions of our experience: indeed, what human-reality finds, at the unattainable end of this flight from itself, is still itself; the flight outside oneself is a flight toward the self, and the world appears purely as the distance from self to self.  It would be pointless, in consequence, to try to find in Sein und Zeit the simultaneous overcoming of any idealism or any realism.  And the difficulties that idealism encounters generally when it comes to founding the existence of concrete beings who resemble ourselves and who, as such, escape our experience—beings who do not in their very constitution fall under our a priori —still arise in the face of Heidegger’s attempt to take “human-reality” out of its solitude.  He seems to escape them because some of the time he takes “outside-oneself” to be “outside-oneself-toward-oneself” and at other times to be “outside-oneself-in-the-Other.” But the second understanding of “outside-oneself,” which he cunningly slips into the course of his reasoning, is strictly incompatible with the first: right in the midst of its ecstases, human-reality remains alone.  That is because—and here is the new insight to be drawn from our critical examination of Heidegger’s doctrines—the nature of the Other’s existence is that of a contingent and irreducible fact.  We encounter the other; we do not constitute him.  And if this fact has nonetheless to appear to us under the aspect of necessity, it will not be the necessity that belongs to the “conditions of possibility of our experience” or, alternatively, ontological necessity: the necessity of the Other’s existence must, if it exists, be a “contingent necessity,” i.e., of just that type of factual necessity with which the cogito impresses itself on us.  If the Other must be able to be given to us, it is through a direct apprehension which leaves the encounter with its character of facticity—just as the cogito itself leaves my own thinking with the entirety of its facticity—and which nonetheless participates in the apodicticity of the cogito itself, i.e., in its indubitability.  This lengthy exposition of doctrine will not have been in vain, therefore, if it enables us to clarify the necessary and sufficient conditions for a theory of the Other’s existence to be valid.  (1) Such a theory must not supply a new proof of the Other’s existence, an argument against solipsism that is better than the others.  If indeed solipsism is to be rejected, it can only be because it is impossible or, alternatively, because nobody is truly a solipsist.  The Other’s existence may always be called into doubt, unless we are specifically doubting the Other only in words, and abstractly, in the same way that I am able to write that “I am doubting my own existence,” though I am unable even to think it.  In brief, the Other’s existence must not be a probability .  In fact probability can only concern objects that appear within our experience, or whose new effects are able to appear within our experience.  There is probability only if in each moment its confirmation or disconfirmation is possible.  If the Other is as a matter of principle and in his “for-itself” outside my experience, the probability of his existence as another self can never be either confirmed or disconfirmed, and nor can it increase or decrease, or even be measured: therefore it loses its very character of probability and becomes a novelist’s mere conjecture.  In the same way, M.  Lalande has succeeded in showing 26 that a hypothesis about the existence of living beings on the planet Mars will remain purely a conjecture, and without any “chance” of being true or false, as long as we do not have at our disposal any instruments or scientific theories that allow facts which confirm or disconfirm this hypothesis to appear to us.  But the Other’s structure is such that, as a matter of principle, no new experience will ever be able to be conceived, and no new theory will ever arrive to confirm or disconfirm the hypothesis of his existence, nor will any instrument come along to reveal new facts that would prompt me to assert or to reject that hypothesis.  If therefore the Other is not immediately present to me, and if his existence is not as assured as my own, any conjecture about him is completely lacking in meaning.  But, precisely, I do not conjecture the Other’s existence: I assert it.  A theory of the Other’s existence must therefore simply question me in my being, illuminate and clarify the meaning of that assertion, and above all, far from inventing a proof, explicate the very foundation of that certainty.  In other words, Descartes did not prove his existence.  Because in fact I have always known that I existed, I have never ceased to practice the cogito .  Similarly, my resistance to solipsism—a resistance that is as lively as that which an attempt to doubt the cogito would arouse—proves that I have always known that the Other existed, that I have always had a complete understanding , albeit implicit, of his existence, that this “preontological” understanding includes an intelligence about the Other’s nature and his relation of being with my being that is more assured and more profound than any theory that has ever been constructed outside it.  If the Other’s existence is not a vain conjecture or pure fiction, it is because there is something like a cogito that applies to it.  It is this cogito that we need to bring to light, by explicating its structures and determining its scope and its entitlements.  (2) But, on the other hand, Hegel’s failure showed us that the only possible starting point was the Cartesian cogito .  Moreover, that alone can establish us in the territory of that factual necessity that belongs to the Other’s existence.  Thus, what we were calling—for want of a better term—the cogito of the Other’s existence merges with my own cogito .  The cogito , examined once again, must throw me outside it onto the Other, as it threw me outside it onto the in-itself; and it must do that, not by revealing to me an a priori structure of myself that would point toward an equally a priori Other but by disclosing to me the concrete and indubitable presence of this or that concrete Other, as it had already revealed to me my incomparable, concrete, contingent, yet necessary existence.  Thus it is the for-itself that we must ask to deliver to us the for-the-Other, and we must ask absolute immanence to throw us into absolute transcendence: in the depths of myself it is not reasons to believe in the Other that I must find but the Other himself, as not being me.  (3) And what the cogito must reveal to us is not an Other-object.  It ought to have occurred to us long ago to reflect that to talk about an object is to talk about something probable .  If the Other is an object for me, he refers me to probability.  But probability is founded solely on the congruence ad infinitum of our representations.  The Other, being neither a representation, nor a system of representations, nor a necessary unity of our representations, cannot be probable ; he cannot be an object first .  If therefore he is for us , that can be neither as a constitutive factor in our knowledge of the world nor as a constitutive factor in our knowledge of the self but insofar as he “interests” our being 27 —and that will be not insofar as he contributes a priori to constituting it but insofar as he interests it concretely and “ontically,” in the empirical circumstances of our facticity.  (4) If it is a matter of attempting for the Other, in some way, what Descartes attempted to do for God with the extraordinary “proof through the idea of the perfect,” which is animated entirely by the intuition of transcendence, we will be obliged to reject, in our apprehension of the Other as the Other, a certain kind of negation, which we have called “external negation.” The Other must appear to the cogito as not being me.  This negation may be conceived in two ways: either it is a pure, external negation and it will separate the Other from myself like a substance from another substance—and in this case any grasp of the Other is by definition impossible—or it will be an internal negation, which means a synthetic and active connection of two terms, each of which constitutes itself by negating itself from the other.  This negative relation will therefore be reciprocal and it will feature a twofold interiority.  That implies, first, that the multiplicity of “Others” cannot be a collection but a totality (on this point we agree with Hegel, since each Other finds his being in the other); but it also means that this Totality is such that it is impossible, as a matter of principle, to take up “the viewpoint of the whole.” We saw, in point of fact, that it is not possible to extract any abstract concept of consciousness from the comparison of my being-for-myself with my objecthood for the Other.  In addition, this totality—like that of the for-itself—is a detotalized totality because, since existence-for-the-Other is a radical refusal of the Other, no totalizing and unifying synthesis of the “Others” is possible.  By setting out from these various observations, we will try, in our turn, to address the question of the Other.  IV.  THE LOOK 28 This woman whom I see coming toward me, this man passing in the street, this beggar whom I hear from my window singing are objects for me: that is beyond doubt.  Thus it is true that one, at least, of the modalities of the Other’s presence to me is objecthood .  But we have seen that, if this relation of objecthood is the Other’s fundamental relation to myself, the Other’s existence remains purely conjectural.  Now, it is not only conjectural but probable that this voice I am hearing is that of a man, and not a song on the gramophone; it is infinitely probable that the passerby whom I see is a man, and not a sophisticated robot.  In other words, my apprehension of the Other as an object, without going beyond the limits of probability and just because of that probability, essentially refers to a fundamental grasp of the Other, in which the Other is no longer disclosed to me as an object but as a “presence in person.” In brief, in order for the Other to be a probable object, and not a dream of an object, his objecthood must refer not to an original solitude out of my reach but to a fundamental connection in which the Other is manifested in some other way than through the knowledge I gain of him.  The classical theories were right to hold that every perceived human organism refers to something, and that what it refers to is the foundation and the guarantee of its probability.  But their mistake is to think that this reference points to a separate existence, a consciousness that lies behind its perceptible manifestations, in the way that the noumenon lies behind Kant’s Empfindung .  29 Whether or not this consciousness exists in a separate state, that is not what the face that I see refers to; it is not the truth of the probable object that I perceive.  The de facto reference to a twinned arising in which the other is present to me—in short, to a “being-in-a-couple-with-the-other”—is given outside knowledge strictly speaking, even if we conceive of it as an obscure and ineffable instance of the intuitive type.  In other words, we have generally considered the problem of the Other as if the primary relation through which the Other is disclosed is objecthood, i.e., as if the Other first revealed himself (directly or indirectly) to our perception.  But, as this perception refers , by its very nature, to something other than itself, and as it cannot refer either to an infinite series of appearances of the same type—as in the idealist account of the perception of a table or chair—or to an isolated entity that is situated by definition out of my reach, its essence must be to refer to a primary relation between my consciousness and that of the Other, in which the Other must be directly given to me as a subject, although in a connection with me, and which is the fundamental relation, the very type of my being-for-the-Other.  Nonetheless, what we are directed to here cannot be some mystical experience, or something ineffable.  The Other appears to us within everyday reality, and his probability refers to everyday reality.  The problem, therefore, becomes more specific: Is there in everyday reality an original relation to the Other that is constantly within our sights, and which can in consequence be disclosed to me, without any reference to some religious or mystical unknowable? In order to find out, we need to examine more closely this banal appearance of the Other within the field of my perception: since that appearance is what refers to this fundamental relation, it must be capable of revealing to us, at least as a reality that we aim at, the relation to which it refers.  I am in a park.  Not far from me I see a lawn and, along this lawn, some chairs.  A man is passing by, close to the chairs.  I see this man; I apprehend him as an object and, at the same time, as a man.  What does this mean? What do I mean when I assert, in relation to this object, that it is a man ? If I were to think that it was nothing but a doll, I would apply to it the categories that I ordinarily use to group spatio-temporal “things.” In that case I might apprehend him as being “beside” the chairs, at 2.20 meters from the lawn, as exerting a specific pressure on the ground, etc.  His relation with the other objects would be of a purely additive type, such that I could eliminate him without any significant modification of the relations between the other objects.  In brief, no new relation would appear through him between these things in my universe: grouped and synthesized on my side into instrumental structures, they would break apart on his side into multiplicities of indifferent relations.  To perceive him as a man, on the contrary , is to grasp a non-additive relation between the chair and him; it is to register an organization without distance of the things in my universe around that special object.  Of course, the lawn remains 2.20 meters away from him but it is also connected to him, as the lawn , in a relation that transcends and contains the distance at the same time.  The two terms of the distance are not indifferent, interchangeable, and reciprocally related; rather, the distance unfolds away from the man I can see and reaches right up to the grass, as a univocal relation that synthetically arises.  We are dealing here with a relation without parts that is given all at once, and within which a spatiality that is not my spatiality unfolds because, rather than being a grouping of objects toward me , we have an orientation that flees me .  Of course, this relation without distance and without parts is in no sense the original relation of the Other to me that I was looking for: in the first place, it involves only the man and the things in the world.  And further, it is still an object of knowledge; I might express it, for example, by saying that this man sees the grass or that, in spite of the sign prohibiting it, he is about to walk on the lawn, etc.  And finally, it retains a character of pure probability: in the first place, it is probable that this object is a man; further, even if it were certain that he is one, it remains merely probable that he sees the grass in the same moment as I see it: he might be dreaming of some enterprise without being fully conscious of his surroundings, he might be blind, etc.  Nonetheless, this new relation between the man-object and the grass-object has a particular character.  It is given to me in its entirety, since it is there, in the world, as an object that I am able to know (and it really is an objective relation that I express when I say “Pierre glanced at his watch,” “Jeanne looked through the window,” etc.), and at the same time it escapes me entirely: to the extent to which the man-object is the fundamental term in this relation, to the extent to which this relation leads toward him , it escapes me, and I am unable to place myself at the center; the distance that unfolds between the grass and the man, through the synthetic arising of this primary relation, is a negation of the distance that I establish—as external negation, in its purest type—between these two objects.  It appears as a pure disintegration of the relations that I apprehend between the objects in my universe.  And I am not the one who brings this disintegration about; it appears to me as a relation that I aim at across the distances that I originally establish between things.  It is like a backdrop to things that necessarily escapes me, and which is conferred upon them from outside.  The appearance among the objects in my universe of an element of disintegration of that universe is, therefore, what I mean by the appearance of a man in my universe.  The Other is in the first instance the permanent flight of things toward a term that I apprehend at the same time as an object at a specific distance from me, and which escapes me insofar as it unfolds its own distances around it.  But this disaggregation gradually spreads; if a relation without distance, and which creates distance, exists between the grass and the Other, there necessarily exists another one between the Other and the statue that stands on its pedestal in the middle of the grass, and between the Other and the tall chestnut trees that border the path; around the Other, an entire space is grouped, and this space is made with my space ; it is a regrouping, at which I am present, and which escapes me, of all the objects that populate my universe.  This regrouping does not stop there: the lawn is something qualified; it is this green lawn, which exists for the Other, such that just this quality of the object—its deep, harsh green—is directly related to this man; this green turns toward the Other a face that escapes me.  I grasp the relation of the green to the Other as an objective relation, but I am unable to grasp the green as it appears to the Other.  Thus, all of a sudden, an object has appeared that has stolen the world from me.  Everything is in place, everything still exists for me, but now an invisible and frozen flight toward a new object penetrates everything.  The Other’s appearing in the world corresponds, therefore, to a frozen sliding away of the universe in its entirety, to a decentering of the world that undermines the centralization I simultaneously impose.  But the Other remains an object for me .  He belongs to my distances: the man is there, twenty steps away from me, and he turns his back to me .  As such, he is once again 2.20 meters away from the grass, six meters away from the statue; the disintegration of my universe is thereby contained within the limits of that universe itself.  It is not a matter of the world fleeing toward nothingness or somewhere outside itself; rather, it seems as if it has been pierced, in the middle of its being, by a drainage hole and as if it is constantly flowing out through that hole.  The universe, the flowing away, and the drainage hole, all these are retrieved once again, seized back, and frozen into an object; it is all there for me , as a partial structure of the world, even though what is at issue here is in fact the universe’s total disintegration.  Often, moreover, I am able to contain these disintegrations within tighter limits: here, for example, is a man who is reading as he walks.  The disintegration of the universe that he represents is purely virtual: he has ears that hear nothing, eyes that see nothing but his book.  Between his book and him I grasp a relation that is undeniable, and without distance, of the same type as the relation that connected the walking man, earlier on, to the lawn.  But, this time, the figure has closed in on itself: an object is there in full, to be grasped.  In the midst of the world I can say “reading-man,” just as I might say “cold stone” or “fine rain”; I grasp a closed “ Gestalt ,” of which reading forms the essential quality and which, apart from that, blind and dumb, lets itself be known and perceived purely and simply as a spatio-temporal thing whose relation with the rest of the world seems to be pure indifferent externality.  Only that very quality of “reading-man”—as the relation between the man and the book—is a small, particular crack in my universe; at the heart of this solid and visible figure, there is a particular emptying out; it is massive only in appearance, and its true sense is to be, in the midst of my universe, ten steps away from me, at the heart of this massivity, a leak 30 that is sealed over and remains strictly local.  None of this, therefore, removes us in any way from the territory in which the Other is an object .  At the most, we are handling a specific type of objectivity, which is quite similar to the kind that Husserl designated as absence , even though he did not point out that the Other is not defined as the absence of a consciousness in relation to the body I can see but by the absence of the world that I perceive, right at the heart of my perceiving of this world.  At this level the Other is a worldly object that we can define in terms of the world.  But this relation of flight, and of the world’s absence in relation to me, is only probable.  If that is what defines the Other’s objectivity, what is the original presence of the Other to which it refers? Now we are able to reply: if the object-Other is defined in connection with the world, as the object who sees what I see, it must be possible to sum up my fundamental connection with the subject-Other through the constant possibility of my being seen by the Other.  It is in and through the revelation of my object-being for the Other that I must be able to apprehend the presence of his subject-being.  For, just as the Other is for the subject-me a probable object, so—in the same way—I can only discover myself in the process of becoming a probable object for a subject who is certain.  This revelation cannot follow from the fact that my universe is an object for the Other-object, as if the Other’s gaze, having wandered over the grass and the surrounding objects, came, by following a particular path, to rest on me.  I have emphasized that I cannot be an object for an object: what is required is a radical conversion of the Other, through which he escapes objectivity.  I cannot therefore consider the look that the Other directs at me as one of the possible manifestations of his objective being: the Other cannot look at me in the way that he looks at the lawn.  And, moreover, my objectivity cannot itself follow for me from the world’s objectivity, since I am precisely the one through whom there is a world; in consequence, and as a matter of principle, I cannot be an object for myself.  Thus this relation, which I describe as “being-seen-by-the-Other,” is far from being one of the relations—among others—to which the word “man” can refer; rather, it represents an irreducible fact that cannot be deduced either from the essence of the object-Other or from my subject-being.  But on the contrary, if the concept of the object-Other is to have a meaning, it can acquire it only through the conversion and the degradation of that original relation.  In brief, what my apprehension of the Other in the world as being probably a man refers to is my constant possibility of being-seen-by-him , i.e., the constant possibility that the object seen by me will be substituted by a subject who sees me.  “Being-seen-by-the-Other” is the truth of “seeing-the-Other.” In this way, the notion of the Other cannot in any circumstance target a solitary and extraworldly consciousness that I am unable even to think: man is defined in relation to the world, and in relation to myself; he is the object in the world that determines an internal flowing away of the universe, an internal hemorrhage; he is the subject whom I encounter in that flight of myself toward objectification.  But the original relation between myself and the Other is not only an absent truth, aimed at through the concrete presence of an object in my universe: it is also a concrete and everyday relation, experienced by me in every instant; at every instant the Other is looking at me .  It is easy therefore for us to undertake, with concrete examples, the description of this fundamental connection that must provide the basis of any theory of the Other; if the Other is, as a matter of principle, the one who looks at me , we ought to be able to explicate the meaning of the Other’s look.  Any look directed at me manifests itself in connection with the coming into view of a sensible figure within our perceptual field but—contrary to what one might think—it is not connected to any figure in particular.  Doubtless, a look is manifested most often by the convergence of two eyeballs toward me.  But it can show itself just as well in a rustling of branches, a sound of steps followed by silence, a half-open shutter, a slight movement of a curtain.  In the course of a coup de main , 31 what the men crawling in the bushes apprehend as a look to be avoided 32 is not two eyes but an entire white farm standing out against the sky at the top of a hill.  It goes without saying that the object constituted in this way is still manifesting the look only as something probable.  It is merely probable that, behind the bush that has just moved, someone is lying in ambush and watching me.  But we will not allow this probability to detain us now; we will return to it.  What matters first is to define the look in itself.  Now, the bush and the farm are not the look; they only represent the eye , because the eye is not grasped in the first instance as a visual sensory organ but as the look’s support.  They never refer, therefore, to the eyes made of flesh of the person watching, lying in wait behind the curtain, behind a window of the farm: taken in themselves, they are already eyes.  On the other hand, the look is neither one quality among others of the object that functions as the eye, nor the total figure of that object, nor some “worldly” relation established between that object and me.  Quite on the contrary, rather than perceiving the look in the objects that are manifesting it, my apprehension of a look that is directed at me appears against a background destruction of the eyes that “are looking at me.” If I apprehend the look, I cease to perceive the eyes: they are there, they remain within my perceptual field as pure presentations , but I do not make use of them; they are neutralized, taken out of play, and they are no longer the object of any thesis; 33 they remain in that state of “disconnection” that characterizes the world in relation to a consciousness that has effected the phenomenological reduction prescribed by Husserl.  We can never judge eyes that are looking at you to be beautiful or ugly, or notice their color.  The Other’s look conceals his eyes; it seems to arrive before them .  This illusion stems from the fact that the eyes, as objects of my perception, remain at a precise distance that is unfolded from me to them—in brief, I am present to the eyes without distance, but they are distant from the place at which I “find myself”—while the look rests upon me without distance and at the same time holds me at a distance; i.e., its immediate presence to me unfolds a distance that separates me from it.  I cannot therefore direct my attention to someone’s gaze without my perception decomposing and moving into the background.  The process here is analogous to what I have tried to demonstrate elsewhere, in relation to the imaginary: 34 what I said then is that we are unable to perceive and to imagine at the same time; it must be either one or the other.  Here I am disposed to say: we cannot perceive the world and apprehend at the same time a look that is directed on us; it must be either one or the other.  That is because to perceive is to be looking , and to grasp a look is not to apprehend a look-object within the world (unless the look is not directed at us) but to become conscious of being-looked-at .  The look manifested by the eyes —whatever their nature—refers me purely to myself.  What I grasp immediately when I hear the branches breaking behind me is not that someone is there but that I am vulnerable, that I have a body that can be hurt, that I am occupying a place and that I cannot in any circumstance escape from the space in which I am, defenseless—in short, that I am seen .  Thus the look is in the first place an intermediary by which I am referred to myself.  What is the nature of this intermediary? What is the meaning for me of being seen? Let us imagine that, through jealousy, curiosity, or vice, I have come to stick my ear against a door or to look through a keyhole.  I am alone and non-thetically conscious (of) myself.  That means in the first place that there is no me inhabiting my consciousness.  There is nothing, therefore, to which I can relate my actions in order to characterize them.  They are in no way known , but I am them and for that simple reason they carry within themselves their complete justification.  I am a pure consciousness of things, and the things, caught within the circuit of my ipseity, offer me their potentialities as a response to my non-thetic consciousness (of) my own possibilities.  Thus, behind this door, a spectacle is proposed as “to be seen,” a conversation as “to be heard.” The door and the keyhole are instruments and obstacles at the same time: they are presented as “to be handled with caution”; the keyhole is given as “to be looked through from close by and a little to the side,” etc.  Henceforth “I do what I have to do”; no transcendent view confers upon my acts the character of something given , to which a judgment might be applied: my consciousness sticks to my actions; it is my actions; they are governed only by the ends to be attained and the instruments to be employed.  My stance, for example, has no “outside”; it is purely what connects the instrument (the keyhole) with the end to be attained (the spectacle to be seen), purely a way of losing myself in the world, of allowing things to soak me up—like ink by a piece of blotting paper—so that an equipment-structure, oriented toward an end, stands out synthetically against the ground of the world.  The order reverses the order of causality: it is the end to be attained that organizes all its preceding moments; the end justifies the means; the means do not exist for themselves and outside the end.  The totality, moreover, exists only in relation to a free project of my possibilities: it is precisely my jealousy—as a possibility that I am —that organizes this equipmental structure as it transcends it toward itself.  But I am this jealousy; I do not know it.  I could learn of it from the worldly equipmental structure only if I were contemplating it rather than creating it.  It is this totality in the world with its twofold and inverse determination—there is only a spectacle to be seen behind the door because I am jealous, but my jealousy is nothing but the simple objective fact that there is a spectacle to be seen behind the door—which we will refer to as the situation .  This situation reflects back to me my facticity and, at the same time, my freedom: with respect to some specific objective structure in the world that surrounds me, it returns my freedom to me in the shape of tasks that are freely to be done; there is no constraint here, since my freedom eats into my possibles and, correlatively, the world’s potentialities are only indicated and proposed.  I cannot therefore define myself truly as being in situation: first, because I do not have a positional consciousness of myself; next, because I am my own nothingness.  In this sense, and because I am what I am not and I am not what I am, I cannot even define myself as truly being in the process of listening at doors; 35 I escape from this provisional definition of myself through the entirety of my transcendence; that, we saw, is the origin of bad faith.  In this way, I am not only unable to know myself but my very being escapes me, even though I am this very escaping from my being and I am not completely anything; nothing is there but a pure nothingness that surrounds and brings out a specific objective structure that is delineated within the world, a real system, an ordering of means in view of an end.  And now I hear footsteps in the corridor: someone is looking at me.  What does this mean? That all of a sudden I am touched in my being, and that essential modifications appear within my structures—modifications that I am able to apprehend and conceptually fix through the reflective cogito .  In the first place, I exist now for my unreflected consciousness as my self  moi .  In fact, this sudden entrance of the self  moi  is what has been most frequently described: the claim has been that I see myself because someone sees me.  In this form, it is not entirely correct.  But let us take a closer look: while we were considering the for-itself in its solitude, we were able to maintain that the unreflected consciousness could not be inhabited by a self: my self could only be given, as an object, to reflective consciousness.  But now we see the self coming to haunt unreflected consciousness.  Now, unreflected consciousness is a consciousness of the world.  For it, therefore, the self exists at the same level as worldly objects; but now this role—the role of presentifying the self—which we had assigned only to reflective consciousness, belongs to unreflected consciousness.  However, reflective consciousness takes the self directly as an object.  Unreflected consciousness does not apprehend the person directly, and as its object; the person is present to consciousness insofar as he is an object for the Other .  In other words, I am suddenly conscious of myself insofar as I escape from myself, not insofar as I am the foundation of my own nothingness but insofar as I have my foundation outside myself.  For myself, I am no more than a pure reference to the Other.  Nonetheless, we should not take this to mean that the object is the Other and that the ego that is present to my consciousness is a secondary structure, or a meaning of the Other-object; here, the Other is not an object and, as we have shown, he cannot be an object without my self simultaneously ceasing to be an object-for-the-Other and disappearing.  Thus I do not aim at the Other as an object, nor at my ego as an object for myself; I cannot even direct an empty intention toward this ego , as if it were an object presently out of my reach; in effect, it is separated from me by a nothingness that I am unable to bridge, since I apprehend it insofar as it is not for me and since it exists as a matter of principle for the other .  I do not aim at it therefore insofar as it might one day be given to me but, on the contrary, insofar as it necessarily flees from me and will never belong to me.  And yet I am it, I do not push it away as a foreign image, but it is present to me as a self that I am without knowing it, for it is in shame (and, in other cases, pride) that I discover it.  It is shame or pride that reveals the Other’s look to me, and myself at the furthest point of his gaze; they make me live , and not know , the situation of being looked at.  Now, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, shame is shame of oneself ; it is the recognition that I really am this object that is looked at and judged by the Other.  I can be ashamed of my freedom only insofar as it escapes me to become a given object.  In this way, the connection between my unreflected consciousness and my looked-at- ego is not originally a connection of knowing but of being.  Beyond any knowledge I can possibly have, I am this self that is known by an other.  And I am this self that I am within a world that the Other has alienated from me, because the Other’s look encompasses my being, and correlatively the walls, the door, the keyhole—all these implement-things—turn toward the other a face that necessarily escapes me.  In this way I am my ego for the Other in the midst of a world that is flowing away toward the other.  But, earlier, we were able to describe the flowing away of my world toward the object-Other as an internal hemorrhage: because the very fact that I was freezing that Other, toward whom this world was bleeding, into an object of my world meant, effectively, that the bleeding was caught and confined; in this way, not a drop of blood was lost, and everything was retrieved, encircled, and confined—albeit within a being that I was unable to penetrate.  Here, on the contrary, the flight is without end, and loses itself outside; the world flows away out of the world, and I flow away out of myself; the Other’s look makes me be, beyond my being in the world, in the midst of a world that is this one and, at the same time, beyond this world.  What kind of relations am I able to maintain with this being that I am, that is disclosed to me by shame? In the first place, it is a relation of being.  I am this being.  Not for an instant would I dream of denying it; my shame is an admission.  I might, later on, make use of bad faith in order to conceal it from me, but bad faith is also an admission, since it is an effort to flee from the being that I am.  But I am not this being that I am either in the mode of “having it to be” or in the mode of “was:” I do not found it in its being; I cannot directly produce it, but neither is it some close, indirect effect of my actions, as in the case where my shadow on the ground, or my reflection in the mirror, moves according to the moves I am making.  This being that I am retains a certain indeterminacy, a certain unpredictability.  And these new characteristics do not stem solely from the fact that I cannot know the Other; they also originate, above all, in the fact that the Other is free—or, to be precise, and reversing our terms, the Other’s freedom is revealed to me through the disturbing indeterminacy of the being that I am for him.  This being, therefore, is not my possible; it is not always in question at the heart of my freedom.  On the contrary, it is the limit of my freedom, its “hidden side” in the sense in which we talk about “the hidden side of the cards”; it is given to me as a burden that I carry, without ever being able to turn back toward it in order to know it, without even being able to sense its weight; if it can be compared with my shadow, it will be a shadow that is projected onto some moving and unpredictable material, such that no system of cross-references could allow us to calculate the distortions resulting from these movements.  And yet it really is a question of my being, and not my being’s image.  It is a question of my being as it is inscribed in and through the Other’s freedom.  It is as though I had a dimension of being from which I was separated by a radical nothingness, and this nothingness is the Other’s freedom; the Other has to make my being-for-him be, insofar as he has his being to be; in this way, each of my free undertakings commits me within a new setting, in which the very fabric of my being is the other’s unpredictable freedom.  And yet, through my shame itself, I lay claim to this freedom of another as my own, and I affirm a profound unity of consciousnesses: not that harmony of monads that has sometimes been taken as a guarantee of objectivity but a unity of being, since I accept, and I want others to confer on me, a being that I recognize.  But shame reveals to me that this being is what I am —not in the mode of was , or “having to be,” but in-itself .  On my own, I am unable to actualize my “being-seated”; at the most we can say that I am it and I am not it at the same time.  It suffices that the Other should look at me, to make me what I am.  Not what I am for myself, of course—I will never succeed in actualizing this being-seated that I apprehend in the Other’s look, and I will always remain a consciousness—but for the other.  Once again, the for-itself’s nihilating movement of escape is frozen, and once again the in-itself re-forms itself on the for-itself.  But, once again, the metamorphosis operates at a distance: for the other I am seated in the way in which this inkwell is on the table; for the other I am leaning toward the keyhole in the way in which this tree is bent by the wind.  Thus I have been stripped, for the other, of my transcendence.  That is because for anyone who witnesses it—i.e., for anyone who is determined as not being this transcendence—it effectively becomes a transcendence that is purely observed, a given-transcendence, which means it acquires a nature solely by virtue of the fact that the other—not through some distortion or some refraction that is imposed on it by his categories but through his very being—confers upon it an outside.  If there is an other, however or whoever he may be, and whatever relations he has with me, and even if he does not act on me in any way other than through the pure arising of his being, I have an outside, and I have a nature .  My original fall is the Other’s existence, and shame—like pride—is my apprehension of myself as a nature, even though this nature itself escapes me and is unknowable as such.  Strictly speaking, I do not feel myself losing my freedom, in order to become a thing ; instead, my freedom is over there, outside the freedom that I live, like a given attribute of this being that I am for the other.  I apprehend the other’s look at the very center of my act , as the solidification and alienation of my own possibilities.  In point of fact, through fear, and through my anxious or sensible expectations, I feel that these possibilities that I am —and that are the condition of my transcendence—are being giving elsewhere to an other as having to be transcended in their turn by his own possibilities.  And the other, qua look, is no more than that: my transcendence transcended.  And doubtless I am still my possibilities, in the mode of my non-thetic consciousness (of) those possibilities, but at the same time the look alienates me from them.  Up until then, I apprehended these possibilities thetically, on and in the world, as the potentiality of implements; the dark corner, in the corridor, transmitted back to me the possibility of hiding as a simple potential quality of its shadows, like an invitation from its darkness; this object’s quality or equipmentality belonged only to it, and was given as an objective and ideal property, marking out its genuine belonging to the structure that we have called the situation .  But, with the Other’s look, a new organization of structures comes to be superimposed on the first.  To grasp myself as seen is, in effect, to grasp myself as seen in the world , and on the basis of the world.  The look does not carve me out from the universe, it comes to find me within my situation, and all that it grasps of me is indissoluble relations with implements: if I am seen as seated I must be seen as “seated-on-a-chair,” if I am grasped as stooping, it is as “stooping-over-the-keyhole,” etc.  But, in consequence, the alienation of myself that is being-seen implies the alienation of the world I am organizing.  I am seen as seated on this chair insofar as I do not see it, insofar as it is impossible for me to see it, insofar as it escapes me in order to become organized, with other relations and other distances, in the midst of other objects (which, similarly, have a hidden side) into a new, and reoriented, structure.  Thus it is that I—who, insofar as I am my possibles, am what I am not, and am not what I am— I am someone.  And what I am—and what necessarily escapes me—is what I am in the midst of the world , and insofar as it escapes me.  In consequence, my relation to the object or to the object’s potentiality disintegrates beneath the Other’s look and appears to me within the world as my possibility of using the object, insofar as this possibility necessarily escapes me, i.e., insofar as the other surpasses it toward his own possibilities.  For example, the potentiality of the dark corner becomes a given possibility of hiding in the corner, simply by virtue of the fact that the other can surpass it toward his possibility of using his flashlight to light up the corner.  This possibility is there, and I grasp it—but as something absent, as within the other —through my anguish and through my decision to abandon this hiding place which is “ unsafe .” In this way, my possibilities are present to my unreflected consciousness insofar as the other is watching me .  If I see his demeanor, prepared for anything, his hand in his pocket where he has a weapon, his finger poised on the electric bell ready to alert the guardhouse “at my slightest move,” I learn of my possibilities from outside and through him, at the same time as I am them—rather as we learn what we are thinking objectively, through our very speech, at the same time as we are thinking it in order to mold it into speech.  This drive to run away, by which I am pulled and mastered and which I am , is something I can read in this watchful look, and in that other look: the weapon trained on me.  I learn of it from the other, insofar as he has foreseen it and already provided for it.  I learn of it from him insofar as he surpasses and disarms it.  However, I do not grasp this surpassing itself but merely the death of my possibility.  It is a subtle death: for my possibility of hiding still remains my possibility; insofar as I am it, it is still alive; and the dark corner does not stop signaling its potentiality to me, sending it back to me.  But if equipmentality can be defined as the state of “being able to be surpassed toward…,” then my possibility itself becomes part of it.  My possibility of hiding in the corner becomes something that the Other may surpass, toward his possibility of unmasking me, identifying me, and apprehending me.  For the Other it is at the same time an obstacle and a means, like all implements.  It is an obstacle because it will oblige him to take various new actions (to walk toward me, to switch on his flashlight).  And it is a means because, once I am uncovered in the impasse, I am “caught.” In other words, any action that I take against the Other can, as a matter of principle, be an instrument for the Other to use against me.  And, precisely, I do not apprehend the Other with a clear vision of what he might make of my action but in fear, a fear that lives all my possibilities in ambivalence.  The Other is the hidden death of my possibilities, insofar as I live this death as hidden in the midst of the world.  The connection between my possibility and the implement is now nothing more than that between two instruments that are arranged one outside the other, in view of an end that escapes me.  The obscurity of the dark spot and my possibility of hiding there are at the same time surpassed by the Other when—before I have been able to make any move to take refuge in it—he lights up the corner with his lantern.  Thus, in the sudden jolt that shakes me when I grasp the Other’s look, there is this: that suddenly I see a subtle alienation of all my possibilities, which are arranged far away from me, in the midst of the world, alongside the world’s objects.  But two important consequences result from this.  The first is that my possibility becomes, outside me, a probability .  Insofar as the Other apprehends my possibility as it is eaten into by a freedom that he is not—a freedom whose witness he becomes and whose effects he calculates—it is a pure indeterminacy within the possibles at play; and that is exactly how I sense it to be.  And later, when we liaise directly with the Other through language, and gradually learn what he thinks of us, this can be, at the same time, a source of fascination and of horror: “I swear that I will do it!” “You may well be right.  That is what you say, and I’d like to believe you; it is possible, indeed, that you will do it.” The very meaning of this dialogue implies that, from the outset, the Other is positioned before my freedom as if before some given, indeterminate property, and confronts my possibles as if they were my probables.  In fact, and from the outset, I feel myself to be over there, for the Other , and this phantom-outline of my being reaches me right at my heart, because—through shame, rage, and fear—I do not cease to accept myself as such.  And I accept myself blindly, since I do not know what I am accepting: I am it, quite simply.  On the other hand, the implement-possibility structure of myself in relation to the implement appears to me as surpassed, and organized into a world, by the Other.  With the Other’s look the “situation” escapes me—or, to use a common expression which nonetheless conveys our thought well: I am no longer master of the situation .  Or, more exactly, I remain its master, but it has a real dimension through which it escapes me, through which unforeseen reversals make it be otherwise than it appears to me.  Of course it can happen that, while I am quite alone, I perform some action whose consequences are the exact opposite of what I foresee and desire: I tug gently at a plank, in order to bring this fragile vase closer.  But this movement has the effect of knocking over a small bronze statue, which smashes the vase into a thousand pieces.  Only there is nothing here that I could not have foreseen if I had been more attentive, if I had noticed the way the objects were arranged, etc.: nothing that escapes me as a matter of principle .  When the other appears, on the contrary, he makes an aspect appear within the situation that I did not want, of which I am not the master, and which escapes me as a matter of principle—because it is for the other .  This is what Gide felicitously named “the devil’s share.” It is the reverse side , unpredictable and yet real.  It is to this unpredictability that Kafka applies his descriptive skills in The Trial and The Castle : in one sense, everything that K.  and the land surveyor do belongs to them as their own and, insofar as they act on the world, the results are strictly in conformity with their predictions: they are actions that succeed.  36 But at the same time the truth of these actions constantly escapes them; they necessarily have a meaning that is their true meaning , and which neither K.  nor the land surveyor will ever know.  And doubtless Kafka is trying here to capture a divine transcendence; it is for a divinity that human action becomes constituted as truth.  But here God is the concept of the Other pushed to its limit.  We will return to this.  This painful and elusive atmosphere of the Trial , this ignorance that is nonetheless lived out as ignorance, this complete opacity that can be sensed only through a complete translucency, is nothing but the description of our being-in-the-midst-of-the-world-for-the-Other.  In this way, therefore, the situation, in and through its surpassing for the Other, becomes frozen and organized around me as a figure , in the sense in which the Gestalt theorists use this term: in it there is a given synthesis in which I am an essential structure, and this synthesis possesses at the same time an ecstatic cohesion and an in-itself character.  My connection with these people whom I can see talking is given all at once, outside me, as an unknowable substrate of the connection that I myself establish.  In particular, my own look —or my connection without distance to these people—is stripped of its transcendence, by virtue of the very fact that it is a looked-at-look .  In point of fact the people whom I see are frozen by me into objects; I am, in relation to them, like the Other in relation to them; in looking at them, I take the measure of my power.  But if the Other sees them and he sees me, my gaze loses its power: it cannot transform these people into objects for the Other , since they are already objects he is looking at.  My looking merely manifests a relation in the midst of the world between the me-object and the object-looked-at, rather like the attraction exerted on each other by two masses across a distance.  Arranged around this look are, on the one hand, its objects—now the distance from me to the things I am looking at exists , but it is closed in, circumscribed, and constricted by my look; the objects-distance structure is like a ground against which my look stands out like a “this” against the ground of the world—and, on the other hand, my postures, which are given as a series of means for “maintaining” my look.  In this sense I constitute an organized whole that is the look: I am a look-object, i.e., a structure of equipment that is endowed with internal finality, and which can itself be placed into a means-end relation in order to actualize a presence to some other object, across a distance.  But the distance is given to me .  Insofar as I am looked at, I do not unfold distance but confine myself to crossing it.  The Other’s look confers spatiality on me.  To grasp oneself as looked at is to grasp oneself as spatialized-spatializing.  But the Other’s look is not only grasped as spatializing: it is also temporalizing .  The appearance of the Other’s look is manifested for me by an “ Erlebnis ” that I could not, by definition, have acquired on my own: simultaneity.  A world for just one for-itself could not include simultaneity but only co-presences, because the for-itself loses itself outside itself throughout the world, and connects all beings solely through the unity of its presence.  Now, simultaneity presupposes a temporal connection between two existents that are not connected by any other relation.  Two existents, each of which exerts a reciprocal action on the other, are not simultaneous, precisely because they belong to the same system.  Simultaneity, therefore, does not belong to worldly existents; it presupposes the co-presence to the world of two presents that can be viewed as presences-to .  Pierre’s presence to the world is simultaneous with my presence.  In this sense, the primary phenomenon of simultaneity is that this glass is for Paul at the same time as it is for me.  That presupposes therefore a foundation of all simultaneity, which must necessarily be the presence of an Other who temporalizes himself beside my own temporalization.  But, precisely, insofar as the Other temporalizes himself , he temporalizes me with him: insofar as he launches himself into his own time, I appear to him within universal time.  The Other’s look , to the extent that I grasp it, comes to give my time a new dimension.  As a present that the Other grasps as my present, my presence has an outside; this presence that is presentified for me becomes alienated for me into a present to which the Other makes himself present; I am thrown into the universal present, insofar as the Other makes himself be a presence to me.  But the universal present in which I take up my place is a pure alienation of my universal present; physical time flows away toward a pure and free temporalization that I am not; what is outlined, at the horizon of this simultaneity that I live, is an absolute temporalization from which I am separated by a nothingness.  As a spatio-temporal worldly object, as an essential structure of a spatio-temporal situation within the world, I am offered to the Other’s assessment.  I grasp that, too, through the pure exercise of the cogito : to be looked at is to grasp oneself as the unknown object of unknowable assessments and, in particular, evaluative assessments.  But, to be precise, at the same time as I recognize—through shame or pride—the validity of these assessments, I do not cease to take them for what they are: a free surpassing of the given toward possibilities.  A judgment is the transcendental act of a free being.  In this way, being seen constitutes me as a defenseless being for a freedom that is not my freedom.  It is in this sense that we may regard ourselves as “slaves,” insofar as we appear to the Other.  But this slavery is not the result—historical, and capable of being overcome—of a life , in the abstract form of consciousness.  I am a slave to the extent to which I am dependent in my being at the heart of a freedom that is not mine, and which is the very condition of my being.  Insofar as I am the object of values that enter in to qualify me—without my being able either to act upon this qualification or even to know it—I am enslaved.  By the same token, insofar as I am the instrument of possibilities that are not my possibilities, whose pure presence I can only glimpse beyond my being, and which negate my transcendence in order to constitute me as a means, toward ends of which I am ignorant, I am in danger .  And this danger is not an accident but the permanent structure of my being-for-the-Other.  Now we have reached the end of this description.  First we must take note—before we can make use of it to explore the Other—that it has been produced entirely at the level of the cogito .  We have only explicated the meaning of those subjective reactions to the Other’s look that comprise fear (the feeling of being in danger before the Other’s freedom), pride or shame (the feeling of being in the end what I am, but elsewhere, over there for the Other), and the recognition of my slavery (the feeling of the alienation of all my possibilities).  In addition, this explication is in no way a conceptual determination of items of (more or less obscure) knowledge .  Let anyone consult their own experience: there is no person in existence who has never been surprised one day in an attitude that is culpable, or simply ridiculous.  The sudden modification that we then experience is not in any way elicited by the incursion of an item of knowledge.  Rather, it is in itself a sudden solidification and stratification of myself, which leaves my possibilities and my structures “for-me” intact, but which suddenly pushes me into a new dimension of existence: the dimension of the unrevealed .  In this way, I grasp the appearing of the look as the arising of an ecstatic relation of being, of which one of the terms is myself—as a for-itself that is what it is not, and is not what it is—and whose other term is me again, but outside my reach, outside my action, outside my knowledge.  And this term, precisely because it is connected with the infinite possibilities of a free Other, is in itself an infinite and inexhaustible synthesis of unrevealed properties.  Through the Other’s look I live myself as frozen in the midst of the world, in danger, and irremediable.  But I do not know either who I am or what my place is within the world, or which face the world I am in is turning toward the Other.  Henceforth we can clarify the meaning of this arising of the Other, in and through his look.  The Other is not in any way given to us as an object.  The objectification of the Other would be the collapse of his look-being.  Moreover, as we saw, the Other’s look even means the disappearance of the Other’s eyes as objects that manifest the look.  The Other cannot even be an object that I emptily aim at, at the horizon of my being for the Other.  As we will see, the objectification of the Other is a defense of my being which, precisely, liberates me from my being for the Other by conferring on the Other a being for me.  In the phenomenon of the look, the Other is by definition something that cannot be an object.  At the same time, we can see that he cannot be a term in the relation between me and myself through which I arise for myself as unrevealed .  Nor can the Other be what I direct my attention to: if, when the Other’s look arose, I were to pay attention to the look or to the Other, these would have to take the form of objects , because attention is an intentional directedness toward objects.  But it would be wrong to conclude from this that the Other is some abstract condition, a conceptual structure of the ecstatic relation: in fact, there is no object here able to be genuinely thought, of which the Other might be a universal and formal structure.  To be sure, the Other is the condition of my unrevealed-being.  But he is its concrete and individual condition.  He is not committed within my being in the midst of the world as one of its integral parts, precisely because it is he who transcends this world in whose midst I am, as unrevealed; as such, he cannot therefore be either an object or a formal and constitutive element of an object.  He cannot appear to me, as we saw, as a unifying or regulative category of my experience, because he comes to me by means of an encounter.  What, therefore, is he? In the first place, he is the being toward whom I do not turn my attention.  He is the one looking at me, and whom I am not yet looking at; the one who delivers me to myself as unrevealed , but without revealing himself; the one who is present to me insofar as he aims at me, and not insofar as he is aimed at: he is the concrete and unreachable pole of my flight, of the alienation of my possibles, and of the flowing away of the world toward another world that is the same as this one and yet cut off from it.  But he cannot be distinct from that alienation itself and from that flowing away; he is its meaning and direction, and he haunts this flowing away, not as a real or categorial element but as a presence that becomes frozen and worldly if I attempt to “presentify” it and which is never more present, or more urgent, than when I am not watching out for him.  If, for example, I am entirely caught up in my shame, the Other is the immense and invisible presence that supports this shame, encompassing it from all sides, the medium that supports my unrevealed-being.  Let us see how the Other is manifested as unrevealable through my lived experience of the unrevealed.  In the first place, the Other’s look , as the necessary condition of my objectivity, is the destruction of all objectivity for me.  The Other’s look reaches me through the world and is not only a transformation of myself but a complete metamorphosis of the world .  I am looked at in a world that is looked at.  In particular, the Other’s look—which is a looking-look, not a looked-at-look—negates my distance to objects and unfolds its own distances.  This look of the Other is immediately given as the way in which distance enters the world, at the heart of a presence without distance.  I step back; I am deprived of my presence without distance to my world, and provided with a distance to the Other.  Here I am, fifteen steps away from the door, and six meters from the window.  But the Other comes to get me, to constitute me at a certain distance from him.  To constitute me as being six meters away from him, the Other must be present to me without distance.  In this way, within my very experience of my distance from things and from the Other, I feel the Other’s presence without distance to me.  Anyone can recognize, in this abstract description, that immediate and burning presence of the Other’s look that has so often filled us with shame.  In other words, insofar as I experience myself as looked at, a transmundane presence of the Other is actualized for me: it is not insofar as he is “in the midst” of my world that the Other looks at me but insofar as he comes in the entirety of his transcendence toward the world and toward me, insofar as he is separated from me not by any distance, or any real or ideal worldly object, or by any worldly body but solely by his nature as the Other.  Thus the appearing of the Other’s look is not an appearance in the world —either in “mine” or in “the Other’s”—and the relation that joins me to the Other cannot be a relation of externality within the world; rather, through the Other’s look, I concretely experience that there is something beyond the world.  The Other is present to me without any intermediary as a transcendence that is not my own .  But this presence is not reciprocal: it would require the entire density of the world for me to be present to the Other.  An omnipresent and elusive transcendence, resting upon me, insofar as I am my unrevealed-being, without intermediary and separated from me by the infinity of being, insofar as this look plunges me into a world which, with its distances and implements, is complete: such is the Other’s look, when I first experience him as a look.  But, in addition, by freezing my possibilities, the Other reveals to me that it is impossible for me to be an object unless it is for another freedom.  I cannot be an object for myself, because I am what I am: with only its own resources, the reflective effort to split into two leads to failure; I am always seized back by myself.  And when I naïvely postulate that it is possible that—without realizing it—I am an objective being, I implicitly presuppose, in that very claim, the Other’s existence: for how could I be an object, other than for a subject? Thus the Other is for me in the first instance the being for whom I am an object, i.e., the being through whom I gain my objecthood.  If it must merely be possible for me to conceive any one of my properties in the objective mode, the Other is already given.  And he is given not as a being in my universe but as a pure subject.  Thus this pure subject whom I am unable, by definition, to know —i.e., to posit as an object—is always there , out of reach and without distance, when I try to grasp myself as an object.  And when I undergo the look, in my experience of my unrevealed objecthood, I experience directly and with my being the Other’s elusive subjectivity.  By the same token, I experience his infinite freedom.  That is because it is for and through a freedom—and only for and through it—that my possibles can be limited and frozen.  A material obstacle could not freeze my possibilities, and is only an opportunity for me to project myself toward other possibles; it could not confer on them an outside .  It is not the same thing to stay at home because it is raining or because you have been forbidden to go out.  In the first case I determine myself, through a consideration of the consequences of my actions, to remain; I surpass the obstacle “rain” toward myself and I make it into an instrument.  In the second case, it is my possibilities themselves—of going out or of remaining—that are presented to me as surpassed and frozen, and which a freedom is at the same time predicting and preventing.  If it often happens that we will do something quite happily and naturally but would be annoyed if someone else were to command us to do it, our behavior is not perverse.  For orders and prohibitions require us to undergo the Other’s freedom, through our own slavery.  In this way, in the look, the death of my possibilities makes me experience the Other’s freedom; it is only brought about at the heart of that freedom, and I am myself, inaccessible to myself and yet myself, thrown and abandoned within the Other’s freedom.  In connection with this experience, my belonging to universal time can appear to me only as contained and actualized by an autonomous temporalization; only a for-itself that temporalizes itself is able to throw me into time.  Thus, through his look, I experience the Other concretely as a free and conscious subject who makes it the case that there is a world by temporalizing himself toward his own possibilities.  And the presence of this subject without an intermediary is the necessary condition for any thought I might attempt to form about myself.  The Other is this “myself” from which nothing separates me, absolutely nothing—unless it is his pure and total freedom, i.e., this indeterminacy of himself that only he has to be, for and through himself.  We know enough now to try to explain the unshakable resistance that good sense has always opposed to solipsistic reasoning.  In fact, that resistance is founded on the fact that the Other is given to me as a concrete and evident presence that I can in no way derive from myself and which cannot in any way be placed in doubt, be made the object of a phenomenological reduction, or any other “ἐποχή.” If someone looks at me, then, I am conscious of being an object.  But this consciousness can be brought about only in and through the Other’s existence.  About that, Hegel was right.  Only this other consciousness and this other freedom are never given to me, because if they were, they would be known—and therefore objects—and I would cease to be an object.  Nor can I derive their concept or representation from my own depths.  This is because, first, I do not “conceive” or “represent” them to myself: expressions of that kind would return us again to the “knowing” that has by definition been ruled out of play.  But, in addition, any concrete experience of freedom that I am able to effect by myself is an experience of my freedom, and any concrete apprehension of consciousness is a consciousness (of) my consciousness; the very notion of consciousness refers only to my possible acts of consciousness.  Indeed, we established in the Introduction that the existence of freedom and consciousness precedes and conditions their essence ; these essences, in consequence, can only subsume particular exemplifications of my consciousness or my freedom.  In the third place, the freedom and consciousness of the Other cannot be categories that serve to unify my representations.  Of course, as Husserl showed, the ontological structure of “my” world demands that it be at the same time a world for the Other .  But, to the extent to which the Other confers a particular type of objectivity on the objects of my world, it is because he is already in that world, as an object.  If it is correct that Pierre, reading in front of me, bestows a particular type of objectivity on the side of the book that is turned toward him, that objectivity is given to a side that I am, as a matter of principle, able to see (even though it escapes me, as we saw, precisely insofar as it is read), which belongs to the world in which I am and which, in consequence, is bound, beyond the distance and through a magical connection, to the Pierre-object.  In these conditions, the concept of the Other may in fact be fixed as an empty form, and constantly used to reinforce the objectivity of the world that is mine.  But the Other’s presence in his looking-look cannot help to reinforce the world; on the contrary, it unworlds it because it actually makes it the case that the world escapes me.  37 When it is relative , and an escaping toward the Other-object, the world’s escaping from me reinforces objectivity; when it is absolute, and operating in the direction of a freedom that is not my own, the escaping of the world—and of myself—from me is a dissolution of my knowledge; the world disintegrates, in order to reintegrate itself as a world over there, but this disintegration is not given to me; I cannot know it, or even merely think it.  The presence to me of the Other-look is not, therefore, an item of knowledge; neither is it a projection of my being, or a form of unification or category.  It is , and I am unable to derive it from myself.  At the same time I cannot make it fall under the phenomenological ἐποχή.  The goal of this latter is, in effect, to place the world within parentheses in order to uncover transcendental consciousness in its absolute reality.  Whether or not this operation is possible in general is not something that we intend to talk about here.  But, in the case that does concern us, it cannot put the Other out of play because, precisely insofar as he is a looking-look, he does not belong to the world.  I am ashamed of myself before the Other, we said.  The consequence of the phenomenological reduction must be to take the object of shame out of play, in order to throw the shame itself into sharper relief, within its absolute subjectivity.  But the Other is not shame’s object : its objects are my act, or my situation within the world.  Strictly speaking, it is these alone that it is possible to “reduce.” The Other is not even an objective condition of my shame.  And yet he is something like its very being.  Shame is the revelation of the Other, not in the way in which a consciousness reveals an object but in the way in which one moment of consciousness laterally implies another moment as its motivation.  Were we, through the cogito , to have reached pure consciousness, and were this consciousness to be only a consciousness (of being) shame, the Other’s consciousness would still haunt it as an elusive presence and would thereby escape any reduction.  This is enough to show us that it is not within the world that we must first seek the Other but on the side of consciousness, as a consciousness in which and through which our consciousness makes itself be what it is.  Just as my consciousness—apprehended through the cogito —bears witness indubitably to itself and to its own existence, there are some particular acts of consciousness—for example “shame-consciousness”—that bear witness to the cogito both of themselves and of the Other’s existence, indubitably.  But—it might be asked—isn’t the Other’s look simply the meaning of my objectivity-for-me? With that we would fall back into solipsism: in integrating myself as an object within the concrete system of my representations, the meaning of this objectification would be projected outside myself and hypostasized as the Other .  But here we must note that: (1) My objecthood for me is not in any way an explication of Hegel’s “ Ich bin Ich .” 38 There is no question here of a formal identity, and my object-being or being-for-the-Other is radically different from my being-for-myself.  Indeed, as we pointed out in Part One, the notion of objecthood requires an explicit negation.  The object is what is not my consciousness and, in consequence, something that does not have the characteristics of consciousness, since the only existent that has the characteristics of consciousness for me is the consciousness that is mine .  Thus the me-object-for-me is a me which is not me, i.e., a me that does not have the characteristics of consciousness.  It is a degraded consciousness: objectification is a radical metamorphosis and, even if I were able to see myself clearly and distinctly as an object, what I would see would not be an adequate representation of what I am in myself and for myself, of this “incomparable monster, to be preferred to everything” that Malraux talks about, 39 but the apprehension of my being-outside-myself, for the other, i.e., the objective apprehension of my other-being, which is radically different from my being-for-myself and does not link up to it.  I could not grasp myself as wicked , for example, by referring to what I am for myself, because I am not, nor can I be, wicked for myself.  That is because, first, I am not wicked for myself, any more than I “am” a civil servant or a doctor.  In fact, I am in the mode of not being what I am and of being what I am not.  To qualify me as “wicked” is, on the contrary, to characterize me as an in-itself .  And next, because if I were to be wicked for myself, I would have to be that in the mode of having it to be , i.e., I would have to grasp myself and to will myself as wicked.  But that would mean that I had to be disclosed to myself as willing something that appears to me as the opposite of my Good and precisely because it was Evil, or the opposite of my Good.  It would be necessary therefore for me explicitly to want the opposite of what I want, within the same moment and within the same relation, i.e., for me to hate myself precisely to the extent that I am myself.  And in order to actualize fully this essence of wickedness in the territory of the for-itself, it would be necessary for me to accept myself as wicked, i.e., to approve of myself through the same action that makes me blame myself.  This suffices to show us that this notion of wickedness can in no way derive its origin from me insofar as I am myself.  And even if I try to push to its extreme limits the ecstasis or self-separation that constitutes me for-myself, if I am left with my own resources I will never succeed in conferring wickedness upon myself, nor even in conceiving it for myself.  For I am my self-separating, and I am my own nothingness; to make all objectivity disappear, it suffices that, between me and myself, I should be my own intermediary.  It is not that I must be this nothingness that separates me from the object-me, since there must be a presentation to me of the object that I am.  In this way I cannot confer any quality on myself without the mediation of an objectifying power that does not lie within my own power and that I am unable either to feign or to forge.  Of course, this has been said: for a long time we have been saying that the Other teaches me who I am.  But the same people who put that thesis forward were asserting, on the other hand, that I derive the concept of the Other from myself, through reflection on my own powers, or through a projection or analogy.  They remained therefore in a vicious circle, from which they were unable to get out.  In fact, the Other cannot be the meaning of my objectivity; he is its concrete and transcendent condition.  In fact, these qualities—“wicked,” “jealous,” “nice,” or “unpleasant”—are not mere dreams; when I make use of them to qualify the Other, I am aware that I want to reach him in his being.  And yet I am unable to live them as my own realities: if the Other confers them on me, they are not rejected by what I am for-myself; when the Other offers me a description of my character, I do not “recognize” myself and yet I know that “it’s me.” I immediately accept this stranger with whom I am presented, without his ceasing to be a stranger.  For he is not a simple unification of my subjective representations, nor is he a “Me” that I am, in the sense of “ Ich bin Ich ”; nor is he a hollow image that the Other forms of me, and for which he would alone bear the responsibility.  This “me” which is incomparable to the me that I have to be is still me, but metamorphosed within a new medium, and adapted to that medium; it is a being, my being, but with entirely new dimensions of being and modalities; it is a me that is separated from me by an unbridgeable nothingness, because I am this me, but I am not this nothingness that separates me from myself.  It is the me who I am through a final ecstasis that transcends all my ecstases , because it is not the ecstasis that I have to be.  My being-for-the-Other is a fall toward objectivity, through an absolute void.  And as this fall is an alienation , I cannot make myself be for myself as an object, because in no circumstance can I alienate myself from myself.  (2) Moreover, the Other does not constitute me as an object for myself but for him .  In other words, he is not used as a regulative or constitutive concept for instances of knowledge that I can have of myself.  The Other’s presence therefore does not make the object-me “appear:” I grasp nothing but an escaping away from myself toward… Even when language has revealed to me that the Other regards me as wicked or as jealous, I will never have a concrete intuition of my wickedness or my jealousy.  They will only ever be fleeting notions, whose very nature will be to escape me: I will not grasp my wickedness but, in relation to this or that action, I will escape from myself; I will feel my alienation and my flowing away toward a being that I am able to think only emptily as wicked and yet that I will feel myself to be, and that I will live at a distance, through shame or fear.  Thus my me-object is neither knowledge nor a unity of knowledge but unease, a lived separation from the for-itself’s ecstatic unity, a limit that I cannot reach and yet that I am.  And the other through whom this self of mine arrives at me is neither knowledge nor a category but the fact of the presence of a foreign freedom.  In fact, my separating from myself and the arising of the Other’s freedom are one and the same; I can only feel them and live them together, and I cannot even try to conceive of one without the other.  The fact of the Other is incontestable and reaches right to my heart.  I actualize it through my unease ; by virtue of it, I am constantly in danger in a world that is this world and yet which I am able only to sense; and the Other does not appear to me as a being who is constituted first in order to encounter me subsequently but as a being who arises in an original relation of being with me, and whose indubitability and factual necessity are those of my consciousness.  However, numerous difficulties remain.  In particular, through shame we confer on the Other an indubitable presence.  Now, as we have seen, it is only probable that the Other is looking at me.  It is certain that this farm that, at the summit of the hill, seems to be looking at the soldiers of the irregular military is occupied by the enemy; 40 but it is not certain that the enemy soldiers are at this moment watching through its windows.  It is not certain that this man, whose steps I can hear behind me, is looking at me; his face may be turned in another direction, his gaze fixed on the ground or on a book; and in the end, quite generally, I cannot be sure that the eyes that are fixed on me are eyes; they might only be “made,” “in the likeness of” real eyes.  In short, because I am able constantly to believe myself to be looked at when I am not, doesn’t the look in its turn become probable ? And will all our certainty of the Other’s existence hereby reassume a purely hypothetical character? We may express the difficulty in these terms: on the occasion of certain appearances within the world that seem to me to manifest a look, I grasp in myself a certain “being-looked-at” with its own structures, directing me to the Other’s real existence.  But it is possible that I am mistaken: perhaps the worldly objects that I took to be eyes were not eyes; perhaps it was only the wind making the bush behind me shake; in brief, perhaps these concrete objects were not really manifesting a look.  In that case, what becomes of my certainty that I am being looked at ? My shame was in effect shame before somebody : but there is nobody there.  Does it not thereby become shame before nobody , which is to say—since someone was posited as being there, when there was nobody—a false shame? This difficulty will not detain us for long, and we would not even have mentioned it if it did not offer the advantage of furthering the progress of our investigation and highlighting more distinctly the nature of our being-for-the-Other.  In fact it confuses two distinct orders of knowledge and two incomparable types of being.  We have always known that the object-in-the-world can be only probable.  That stems from its very character as an object.  It is probable that the passerby is a man; and if he turns his eyes toward me, although I immediately experience, with certainty, my being-looked-at , I cannot transfer this certainty into my experience of the object-Other.  In effect, it only discloses the subject-Other, a transcendent presence to the world and the real condition of my object-being.  In any event, it is therefore impossible to transfer my certainty of the subject-Other on to the object-Other who was the occasion of this certainty and, conversely, to disconfirm the evidence of the subject-Other’s appearance, on the basis of the probability that is constitutive of the object-Other.  Better still, the look , as we have shown, appears on the ground of the destruction of the object manifesting it.  If this fat and ugly passerby who is approaching me, and skipping, suddenly looks at me, that is the end of his ugliness and obesity and skipping: throughout the time in which I feel myself to be looked at he is a pure freedom, mediating between myself and me.  Being-looked-at cannot therefore depend on the object which manifests the look.  And since my shame, as an “ Erlebnis ” that can be grasped reflectively, testifies to the Other to the same degree as to itself, I am not going to put it in question on the occasion of a worldly object that can, as a matter of principle, be revoked by doubt.  I might as well doubt my own existence because the perceptions that I have of my own body (when, for example, I see my hand) are subject to error.  If therefore, being-looked-at , considered in its purest form, is not linked to the Other’s body any more than my consciousness of being a consciousness, when the cogito is purely actualized, is linked to my own body , we must consider the appearance of certain objects within the field of my experience, and in particular the convergence of the Other’s eyes in my direction, as a pure monition , as the pure occasion for the realization of my being-looked-at, in the way in which, for Plato, the contradictions of the sensible world are the occasion for bringing about a philosophical conversion.  In brief, what is certain is that I am looked at ; what is only probable is that the look is connected to this or that intramundane presence.  Moreover, nothing in that should surprise us, since, as we saw, it is never eyes that are looking at us; it is the Other as a subject.  But, we may be told, it remains the case that I may discover that I was mistaken: there I am, bent over the keyhole; suddenly I hear some steps.  A shudder of shame runs through me: someone has seen me.  I stand up, and I scan with my eyes the deserted corridor: it was a false alarm.  I take a breath.  Here, do we not have an experience that is its own destruction? Let us take a closer look.  Is it my objective-being for the Other that has been revealed as an error? Not at all.  The existence of the Other is so far from being placed in doubt that this false alarm may easily have as a consequence that I abandon my enterprise.  If on the contrary I persevere, I will feel my heart beating and I will watch out for the slightest noise, the slightest creaking of the steps in the staircase.  Far from the Other having disappeared with my first alert, now he is present everywhere, beneath me, above me, in the neighboring bedrooms, and I continue to feel my being-for-the-Other profoundly.  It is even possible that my shame does not disappear: it is with a red face, now, that I lean over toward the keyhole; I do not cease to undergo my being-for-the-Other; 41 my possibilities do not cease to “die,” nor do the distances stop unfolding toward me from the staircase where someone “might” be, from that dark corner where a human presence “might” be hiding.  Better still, if I start at the slightest sound, if each creak announces a look to me, that is because I am already in the state of being-looked-at.  In brief, what therefore was it that misleadingly appeared and was then destroyed during the false alert? It is not the subject-Other, or his presence to me: it is the Other’s facticity , i.e., the contingent connection between the Other and an object-being within my world.  Thus it is not the Other himself who is doubtful; it is the Other’s being-there , which is to say this historical and concrete event that we can express by the words “There is someone in that bedroom.” These observations will enable us to go further.  The Other’s presence in the world cannot follow analytically, in effect, from the Other-subject’s presence to me, because this original presence is transcendent, which is to say being-beyond-the-world.  I believed that the Other was present in the room, but I was mistaken: he was not there; he was “absent.” What, then, is absence ? If we take the word absence in its empirical and everyday usage, it is clear that I will not use it to refer to just any kind of “not-being-there.” In the first place, if I do not find my packet of tobacco in its usual place, I do not say that it is absent from that place, even though I might assert that “it should be there.” That is because, even though it may sometimes be carefully assigned to it, the place for a material object or an instrument does not follow from its nature .  This latter may just about confer on it a location, but it is through me that an instrument’s place is actualized.  Human-reality is the being through whom a place comes to objects.  And it is human-reality, alone, insofar as it is its own possibilities, that is able from the outset to take up a place.  But, on the other hand, I would not say either that the Aga Khan or the Sultan of Morocco is absent from this apartment here—but rather that Pierre, who usually lives there, has been absent from it for a quarter of an hour.  In brief, absence is defined as a mode of being of human-reality in relation to locations and to places that it has itself determined through its presence.  Absence is not a nothingness of connection with a place but, on the contrary, I determine Pierre in relation to some determinate place by declaring that he is absent from it.  And finally I do not talk about Pierre’s absence in relation to a natural place, even if he often passes through it.  But, on the contrary, I might deplore his absence from some picnic that “takes place” in some region where he has never been.  Pierre’s absence is defined in relation to a place at which he ought to determine himself to be, but that place itself is not delimited as a place by its site, or even by solitary relations between that place and Pierre himself, but by the presence of other human-realities.  It is in relation to other men that Pierre is absent.  Absence is a concrete mode of Pierre’s being in relation to Thérèse: it is a connection of being between human-realities, and not between human-reality and the world.  It is through his relation to Thérèse that Pierre is absent from this location .  Absence therefore is a connection of being between two or several human-realities that necessitates the fundamental presence of each of these realities for the others, and which, moreover, is only one of the particular ways of instantiating that presence.  To be absent, for Pierre in relation to Thérèse, is a particular way of being present to her.  In fact absence is significant only if all Pierre’s relations with Thérèse remain intact: he loves her, he is her husband, he provides for her keep, etc.  In particular, absence presupposes the conservation of Pierre’s concrete existence: death is not an absence.  From this it follows that Pierre’s distance from Thérèse does nothing to change the fundamental fact of their reciprocal presence.  In fact, if we consider this presence from Pierre’s point of view, we can see that it means either that Thérèse is existing in the midst of the world as an Other-object or that he feels himself to exist for Thérèse as for an Other-subject .  In the first case the distance is a contingent fact and means nothing in relation to the fundamental fact that it is Pierre through whom “there is” a world in the form of a Totality, and that Pierre is present without distance to this world, as the one through whom distance exists.  In the second case, wherever Pierre is, he feels himself to exist for Thérèse without distance: she is at a distance from him to the extent to which she separates him from her, and unfolds a distance between herself and him; the entire world separates him from her.  But, insofar as he is an object in the world that she brings into being, he is without any distance to her.  In either case, in consequence, their separation cannot modify these essential relations.  Whether the distance is small or great, between Pierre-object and Thérèse-subject, between Thérèse-object and Pierre-subject, there lies the infinite breadth of a world; between Pierre-subject and Thérèse-object, between Thérèse-subject and Pierre-object, there is no distance at all.  In this way the empirical concepts of “absence” and “presence” are two specifications of a fundamental presence, of Pierre to Thérèse and of Thérèse to Pierre; all they do is express that presence in one way or another, and only through it do they have any meaning.  In London, in India, in America, on a desert island, Pierre is present to Thérèse, who has remained in Paris; he will only cease to be present to her at his death.  That is because a being is not situated through his relation with places, by his degree of longitude and his degree of latitude: he is situated within a human space, between “the Guermantes way” and “Swann’s way,” and what allows that “hodological” space in which he is situated to unfold is the immediate presence of Swann or of the Duchess of Guermantes.  42 Now, this presence takes place within transcendence; it is the presence to me, within transcendence, of my cousin from Morocco that enables me to unfold, between myself and him, this path that situates-me-in-the-world and which we might call “the road to Morocco.” In fact, this road is no more than the distance between the object-Other that I am able to perceive in its connection with my “being-for” (and) the subject-Other who is present to me without distance.  43 In this way I am situated by the infinite diversity of the roads that lead me to objects of my world in correlation with the immediate presence of transcendent subjects.  And as the world with all of its beings is given to me all at once, these roads represent only the set of instrumental complexes that enable some Other-object—already implicitly and really contained within it—to appear as a “this” against the ground of the world.  But these remarks can be generalized: it is not only Pierre, René, and Lucien who are absent or present in relation to me against the ground of an original presence, because it is not they alone who contribute to situate me.  I am also situated as a European in relation to Asians or to Negroes, as an old man in relation to young people, as a magistrate in relation to offenders, as a bourgeois in relation to workers, etc.  In brief, it is in relation to every living man that the entirety of human-reality is present or absent against the ground of an original presence.  And this original presence can only have meaning as a being-looked-at or as a looking-being—in other words, according to whether the Other is an object for me or I myself am an object-for-the-Other.  Being-for-the-Other is a constant fact of my human reality and I grasp it, with its factual necessity, in the slightest thought that I form about myself.  Wherever I go, whatever I do, I am only changing my distances to the object-Other, only following roads toward the Other.  To move away, to come closer, or to discover this particular Other-object is only to enact empirical variations on the fundamental theme of my being-for-the-Other.  The Other is present to me everywhere, as that through which I become an object.  Given that, I may well be mistaken about the empirical presence of an Other-object that I have just met on my way.  I may well believe it is Anny who is coming toward me on the path, and discover that it is an unknown person: Anny’s fundamental presence to me is not thereby modified.  I may well believe that a man is watching me in the shadows, and discover that it is a tree trunk which I took to be a human being: my fundamental presence to all men, the presence to me of all men, is not thereby altered, because the appearing of some man as an object within the field of my experience is not what teaches me that there are men.  My certainty of the Other’s existence is independent of these experiences and it is the former, on the contrary, that makes them possible.  What appears to me then, and what I can be wrong about, is not the Other, nor the real and concrete connection between the Other and me, but rather a this by which an object-man might be represented—just as, also, it might not represent him.  What is only probable is the Other’s distance and his real proximity, which is to say that his character as an object and his belonging to the world that I bring to disclosure are not doubtful, insofar as I make it the case, merely by arising, that an Other appears.  Only this objectivity is founded within the world under the description “the Other within the world somewhere:” as something that appears, the object-Other is certain, and the correlative of my taking up of my subjectivity; but it is never certain that the Other is this object.  And, similarly, the fundamental fact—my being-an-object for a subject—is supported by evidence of the same type as the evidence of reflection, but not the fact that, in this precise moment and for one particular Other, I stand out as a this against the ground of the world, rather than remaining drowned within some ground’s lack of distinction.  That I exist now as an object for a German, whoever he is: that is indubitable.  But do I exist in my capacity as a European, a Frenchman, or a Parisian within these undifferentiated groupings, or in my capacity as this Parisian, around whom the Parisian population and the French collectivity are suddenly organized in order to provide him with a ground? On this point I will be able to obtain knowledge that is only probable—even though it may be infinitely probable.  We are able now to grasp the nature of the look: in every look an object-Other appears within my perceptual field as a concrete and probable presence and, on the occasion of various attitudes of this Other, I determine myself to grasp—through shame, anguish, etc.—my “being-looked-at.” This “being-looked-at” is presented as the pure probability that I am presently the concrete this —a probability that can derive its meaning, and its very nature as probable, only from a fundamental certainty that the Other is always present to me insofar as I am always for the Other .  The experience of my condition as a man, as an object for all other living men, thrown into the arena before millions of eyes—and escaping millions of times from myself—is concretely actualized by me on the occasion of an object’s arising within my universe, if this object indicates to me that I am probably an object now as a differentiated this for some consciousness.  That is the totality of the phenomenon that we are calling “the look .” Each look makes us concretely experience—and within the indubitable certainty of the cogito —that we exist for all living men, i.e., that there are (some) consciousnesses for whom I exist.  We put “some” in brackets in order to highlight that the subject-Other who is present to me in this look is not given in the plural form, any more than he is, moreover, given as a single item (except in his concrete relation to one particular object-Other).  In point of fact, plurality only belongs to objects; it arrives in being through the appearance of an enworlding for-itself.  44 Being-looked-at, by making (some) subjects arise for us, puts us in the presence of a reality that is not numbered.  On the contrary, from the moment I am looking , the people who are looking at me—the other consciousnesses—become isolated within a multiplicity.  If, on the other hand, by turning away from the look in the circumstance of some particular experience, I try to think the human presence, in its infinite lack of distinction, emptily and to unify it under the concept of the infinite subject who is never an object, I will obtain a purely formal notion, which refers to an infinite series of mystical experiences of the Other’s presence: the notion of God as the omnipresent and infinite subject for whom I exist.  But both of these two objectifications, the concrete objectification that is countable, and the abstract and unifying objectification, miss the reality that is undergone, i.e., the Other’s pre-numerical presence.  The following observation—which anyone can make—will render these remarks more concrete: if we find ourselves appearing “in public” in order to perform a role or to give a lecture, we do not lose sight of the fact that we are looked at, and we carry out the series of actions that we have come to perform in the presence of the look; or, better, we try to constitute a being and a set of objects for this look.  But we do not enumerate the look.  For as long as we are speaking, and attending only to the ideas that we want to develop, the Other’s presence remains undifferentiated.  It would be a mistake to unify it under the categories “ the class ,” “ the audience ,” etc.: we are not in fact conscious of a concrete and individuated being with a collective consciousness; those are images that we might use later to express our experience and largely to betray it.  But neither do we grasp a plural look.  Rather, we find ourselves dealing with an intangible, fleeting, and omnipresent reality, which actualizes our non-revealed Me before us, and collaborates with us in producing this Me that escapes me.  If, on the contrary, I want to check that my idea has been clearly understood, and if I look in my turn at the audience, I will suddenly see some heads and some eyes appearing.  In becoming objectified, the pre-numerical reality of the Other has become decomposed and pluralized.  But the look has also disappeared.  It is for this pre-numerical and concrete reality, rather than for some inauthentic condition of human-reality, that we ought to reserve the term “ they .” 45 Constantly, wherever I am, they are looking at me.  The they is never grasped as an object; it immediately disintegrates.  Thus the look has set us on the path to our being-for-the-Other and revealed to us the indubitable existence of this Other, for whom we are.  But it cannot take us any further: what we are obliged to investigate next is the fundamental relation between Me and the Other, as we have encountered it or—alternatively—our task now is to explicate and to determine thematically everything included within the limits of this original relation and to ask ourselves what the being of this being-for-the-Other is.  A consideration—implicit in our earlier remarks—that will help us in this task is that being-for-the-Other is not an ontological structure of the for-itself: we cannot expect, in fact, to derive being-for-the-Other from being-for-itself, in the way we can derive a consequence from a principle; nor, conversely, can we derive being-for-itself from being-for-the-Other.  Doubtless, it is a requirement of our human-reality that it be simultaneously for-itself and for-the-Other, but our present investigation does not aim to constitute an anthropology.  It would not perhaps be impossible to conceive of a for-itself who was wholly free of any for-the-Other and able to exist without even suspecting the possibility of being an object.  Only this for-itself would not be “man.” What the cogito reveals to us here is simply a factual necessity: it happens—and this is indubitable—that our being, in connection with its being-for-itself, is also for the Other; the being that is revealed to reflective consciousness is for-itself-for-the-Other; the Cartesian cogito only asserts the absolute truth of a fact , the fact of my existence; likewise, the slightly expanded cogito that we have been using here reveals as a fact the Other’s existence to us, and my existence for the Other.  That is all we can say.  Therefore my being-for-the-Other, like the arising into being of my consciousness, has the character of an absolute event.  As this event is at the same time a historialization—because I temporalize myself as a presence to the Other—and the condition of any history, we will call it an “ante-historical historialization.” And it is in this capacity, as an ante-historical temporalization of simultaneity, that we are considering it here.  By “ante-historical” we do not mean that it exists in some time that is anterior to history—that would make no sense—but that it forms part of that original temporalization which historializes itself as it makes history possible.  It is as a fact—as a primary and a constant fact—and not as an essential necessity that we are studying our being-for-the-Other.  We saw earlier the difference between the two types of negation: internal and external negation.  In particular, we noted that the foundation for any knowledge of a determinate being is the original relation through which the for-itself, even as it arises, has to be as not being this being.  The negation that the for-itself hereby actualizes is an internal negation; the for-itself actualizes it in the fullness of its freedom; better, it is this negation, insofar as it chooses itself as finitude.  But it connects it indissolubly to the being that it is not, and we were able to say that the for-itself includes, within its being, the being of the object that it is not, insofar as it is in question in its being as not being this being.  These observations can be applied without any essential change to the for-itself’s first relation with the Other.  If there is an Other in general, it is necessary above all that I should be the one who is not the other, and it is in this negation itself—operated by me, and in relation to me—that I make myself be and that the Other arises as the Other.  This negation that constitutes my being—and which, as Hegel says, makes me appear as the Same in the face of the Other—constitutes me in the domain of non-thetic ipseity as “ Myself .” We should not take this to mean that some me comes to inhabit our consciousness but rather that my ipseity is reinforced by arising as the negation of another ipseity, and that this reinforcement is positively grasped as the ipseity’s continuous choice by itself of itself as the same ipseity, and as this ipseity itself .  A for-itself that had its “itself” to be without being its self is conceivable.  Only the for-itself that I am has to be what it is in the form of a refusal of the other, i.e., as its self.  46 In this way, by using expressions that we apply to our knowledge of the Non-me in general, we are able to say that the for-itself, as its self, includes the Other’s being within its being insofar as it is in question in its being as not being the Other.  In other words, in order for it to be possible for consciousness not to be the Other and, therefore, in order for it to be possible for “there to be” an Other without this “not being”—which is the condition of the “ itself ”—being purely and simply an object remarked by a “third man” witness, it is necessary that it should have to be this not-being itself, and spontaneously; it is necessary that it should detach itself freely from the Other, and separate itself from him, by choosing itself as a nothingness that is simply other than the other and is thereby reunited with itself within “its self.” And this very separation that is the for-itself’s being makes it the case that there is an Other.  That does not mean that it gives being to the other but simply that it gives him “other-being,” or the essential condition of the “there is.” And it goes without saying that, for the for-itself, the mode of being-what-is-not-the-Other is entirely penetrated by Nothingness: the for-itself is that which is not the Other in the nihilating mode of its reflection-reflecting; my not-being-the-Other is never given but constantly chosen in a perpetual resurrection; consciousness can only not be the Other insofar as it is conscious (of) its self as not being the Other.  In this way, internal negation—here, as in the case of presence to the world—is a unitary connection of being: it is necessary that the Other be everywhere present to consciousness and even that he should penetrate it in its entirety, in order for consciousness to escape—precisely by being nothing —from this Other in whom there is a risk of becoming stuck.  If consciousness suddenly were something, the distinction between oneself and the Other would disappear within a complete lack of differentiation.  Only this description has to include an essential addition, which will radically modify its impact.  When consciousness was effectively actualized as not being such and such a this in the world, the negative relation was not reciprocal: the envisaged this did not make itself as not being consciousness; consciousness determined itself in it and through it—as not being it—but its relation to it remained that of pure indifferent externality because, effectively, it retained its nature as in-itself .  And it is as in-itself that consciousness revealed it, in the very negation through which the for-itself was making itself be, by denying in relation to itself that it was in-itself.  But when it is a question of the Other, on the contrary, the negative internal relation is a reciprocal relation.  The being that consciousness has not to be is defined as a being who has not to be this consciousness.  This is because, at the moment when a this was perceived within the world, consciousness was in fact differentiated from the this not only by its own individuality but also by its mode of being.  It was for-itself , in the face of the In-itself .  In contrast, in the case of the Other’s arising, consciousness does not differ at all in relation to its mode of being from the other: the other is what consciousness is; it is for-itself and consciousness; it refers to possibles that are its possibles; it is itself through its exclusion of the other; there can be no question of its opposing itself to the other purely by some numerical determination.  There are not two consciousnesses, or several consciousnesses, here: enumeration would effectively presuppose an external witness, and consists in a straightforward observation of externality.  There can be an other for the for-itself only in a spontaneous and pre-numerical negation.  The other exists for consciousness only as a oneself that is refused .  47 But precisely because the other is a oneself or himself, he can be a himself that is refused for me and through me only insofar as he is himself the one who refuses me .  48 I can neither grasp nor conceive of a consciousness that does not grasp me.  The only consciousness that can exist without in any way apprehending me or refusing me—and that it is possible for me to conceive—is not a consciousness isolated somewhere outside the world but my own.  In this way, the other that I recognize in order to refuse to be him is above all the one for whom my for-itself is .  The one who I make myself not be, in effect, is not only not me by virtue of my denying that he is me; instead, the being whom I make myself not be is, precisely, a being who makes himself not be me.  Only this double destruction is in a sense destructive of itself: either, in fact, I make myself not be some specific being and, in that case, he is an object for me and I lose my objecthood for him; in this case the other ceases to be the me-other, i.e., the subject who makes me be an object by refusing to be me; or else this being really is the other and makes himself not be me—but in this case I become an object for him, and he loses his own objecthood.  Thus, from the outset, the other is a Not-me-not-object.  Whatever the subsequent processes in the dialectic of the Other may be, if the other is first of all to be the other, he is the one who, as a matter of principle, cannot be revealed in just that event of arising through which I deny that I am him.  In this sense, my fundamental negation cannot be direct, because there is nothing for it to bear upon.  In the end, what I refuse to be can be nothing but that refusal to be me through which the other makes me an object; or, alternatively, I refuse my refused Me; I determine myself as myself by my refusal of the refused-Me; I posit this refused Me as an alienated-Me in the very moment of arising through which I separate myself from the Other.  But, just by so doing, I recognize and affirm not only the Other but the existence of my Me-for-the-Other—because, in effect, I cannot not be the Other unless I accept my object-being for the Other.  The disappearance of the alienated Me would bring the Other’s disappearance in its wake, through the collapse of my Me-self.  49 I escape from the Other by leaving my alienated Me between his hands.  But as I choose myself as this separation from the Other, I take up this alienated Me and recognize it as mine.  My separating from the Other—i.e., my Me-self—is in its essential structure the acceptance as mine of this Me that the Other refuses; it is even no more than that .  Thus this alienated and refused Me is at the same time my connection to the Other and the symbol of our absolute separation.  In fact, to the extent to which I am the one who makes it the case that there is an Other, through the affirmation of my ipseity, the object-Me is mine and I lay claim to it because the separation between the Other and myself is never given and I am constantly responsible for it in my being.  But insofar as the Other is co-responsible for our original separation, this Me escapes from me, since it is what the Other makes himself not be.  In this way I lay claim, as being mine and for me, to a me which escapes me, and as I make myself not be the Other, insofar as the Other is a spontaneity identical to my own, it is precisely as a Me-that-escapes-from-me that I lay claim to this object-Me.  This object-Me is a Me that I am just to the extent to which it escapes me, and I would on the contrary refuse it as being mine, if it were possible for it to coincide with myself, in pure ipseity.  Thus my being-for-the-Other, which is to say my object-Me, is not an image cut off from me and vegetating within a foreign consciousness: it is a being that is perfectly real, my being as the condition of my ipseity in the face of the Other, and of the Other’s ipseity in the face of me.  It is my being-outside : not a being that is undergone, and that has itself come from outside, but an outside that is taken up and recognized as my outside.  In effect it is only possible for me to negate the Other in relation to me insofar as the Other is himself a subject .  If I could refuse the Other immediately, as a pure object—i.e., as an existent in the midst of the world—it would not be the Other that I was refusing but instead an object that would, as a matter of principle, have nothing in common with subjectivity; I would remain without any defense against a complete assimilation of myself with the Other, for want of staying on my guard within the Other’s true domain, subjectivity, which is also my domain.  I can hold the Other at a distance only by accepting a limit to my subjectivity.  But this limit cannot come from me, nor can it be thought by me, because I cannot limit myself; otherwise I would be a finite totality.  On the other hand, and in accordance with Spinoza’s terms, thought can be limited only by thought.  Consciousness can be limited only by consciousness.  The limit between two consciousnesses, insofar as it is produced by the limiting consciousness and taken up by the limited consciousness: that is what delivers my object-Me.  And we must understand this in both senses of the word “limit.” From the side of what limits me, I grasp the limit as the content that contains me and surrounds me, the sleeve of emptiness that exempts me as a totality, by taking me out of play; from the side that is limited, the limit relates to any phenomena of ipseity in the way a mathematical limit relates to the series that approaches it without ever reaching it; all of the being that I have to be is, in relation to its limit, like a curve that is the asymptote to a straight line.  In this way I am a detotalized and indefinite totality, contained within a finite totality that surrounds it at a distance and that I am, outside myself, without ever being able to actualize it or even to reach it.  A good image of my efforts to apprehend myself and of their futility is provided by that sphere, discussed by Poincaré, whose temperature decreases from its center to its surface: living creatures attempt to get through to the surface of this sphere, setting out from its center, but the lowering of the temperature induces in them a continuous process of increasing contraction; as they approach their goal they tend toward an infinite flatness and are thereby separated from it by an infinite distance.  However, this unreachable limit that is my object-Me is not ideal: it is a real being.  This being is not in-itself because it is not produced in pure indifferent externality; but neither is it for-itself because it is not the being that, in nihilating myself, I have to be.  It is precisely my being-for-the-Other , the being that is pulled between two negations whose origins are opposed and which face in different directions, since the Other is not this Me of whom he has an intuition and, as for me, I do not have an intuition of this Me that I am.  Yet this Me, produced by one and taken up by the other, derives its absolute reality from the fact that it is the only possible separation between two beings that are fundamentally identical with respect to their mode of being, and of which each is immediately present to the other, since—as it is consciousness alone that is able to limit consciousness—any middle term between them is inconceivable.  It is on the basis of this subject-Other’s presence to me, in and through the objecthood that I have accepted, that we will be able to understand the Other’s objectification as the second moment in my relation to the Other.  In effect, the Other’s presence beyond my unrevealed limit can serve to motivate me to seize myself back as a free ipseity.  To the extent that I negate myself as the Other and that the Other is manifested first, he is able to be manifested only as the Other, which is to say as a subject beyond my limit, i.e., as that which limits me.  In effect, nothing apart from the Other can limit me.  He appears therefore as that which, in his full freedom and in his free projection toward his possibles, takes me out of play and strips me of my transcendence by refusing “to do or to make  faire  anything with me” (in the sense of the German: mit-machen ).  50 Thus I am obliged to grasp first, and solely, the one of the two negations for which I am not responsible, the one that does not come to me from me.  But, in my very apprehension of this negation, a consciousness (of) me as myself arises, which means I am able to become explicitly conscious (of) myself insofar as I am also responsible for a negation of the Other that is my own possibility.  That is the explication of the second negation, the one that goes from me to the Other.  To tell the truth, it was already there, but concealed by the other, since it was disappearing in order to make the other appear.  But the other is, precisely, the motivation for the new negation to appear: because if there is an other who takes me out of play by positing my transcendence as something purely contemplated, that is because, in taking up my limit, I separate myself from the Other.  And my consciousness (of) this separation or my consciousness (of being) the same in relation to the other is a consciousness (of) my free spontaneity.  Through this very act of separating from him—which puts the other in possession of my limit—I have already taken him out of play.  Insofar therefore as I become conscious (of) myself as one of my free possibilities and I project myself toward myself in order to actualize this ipseity, I find myself responsible, now, for the Other’s existence: it is I who make it the case, just by affirming my free spontaneity, that there is an Other and not merely an infinite referral of consciousness to itself.  The Other therefore finds himself put out of play—as what it is up to me not to be—and, in consequence, his transcendence is no longer a transcendence that transcends me toward himself; it is a transcendence that is purely contemplated, a circuit of ipseity that is merely given .  And as I cannot actualize the two negations at the same time, the new negation, even though it was motivated by the first one, conceals it in its turn: the Other appears to me as a degraded presence.  In fact, the other and I are co-responsible for each other’s existence, but the two negations needed for this are such that I am unable to experience either one of them without its immediately concealing the other.  In this way the Other now becomes what I limit, in my very projection toward not-being-the-Other.  Naturally, we have to conceive of the motivation for this transition as affective in type.  For example, nothing would prevent me from remaining fascinated by this Unrevealed with its beyond, were it not that I was actualizing precisely this Unrevealed in my fear, in shame, or in pride.  And the affective character of these motivations, precisely, explains the empirical contingency of these changes in viewpoint.  But these feelings themselves are nothing more than our way of experiencing affectively our being-for-the-Other.  Fear, in fact, implies that I appear to myself as threatened in my capacity as a presence in the midst of the world, and not in my capacity as a for-itself who makes it the case that there is a world.  It is the object that I am that is in danger in the world and which, as such, because of its indissoluble unity of being with the being that I have to be, is able to drag with it the ruin of the for-itself that I have to be, along with its own.  Fear is therefore the discovery of my object-being on the occasion of the appearance of another object within my perceptual field.  It directs us to the origin of all fear, which is the fearful discovery of my pure and simple objecthood, insofar as it is surpassed and transcended by possibles that are not my possibles.  It is by throwing myself toward my own possibles that I will escape from fear, to the extent to which I will regard my objecthood as inessential.  That is possible only if I grasp myself insofar as I am responsible for the Other’s being.  The Other becomes in that case what I make myself not to be , and his possibilities are possibilities that I refuse, and that I can merely contemplate, therefore dead-possibilities.  In so doing, I surpass my present possibilities, insofar as I consider them as always being able to be surpassed by the Other’s possibilities, but I also surpass the Other’s possibilities, by considering them from the point of view of the only quality that he has that is not his own possibility—his very character as the Other, insofar as I make it the case that there is an Other—and by considering them as possibilities of surpassing me that I can always surpass toward new possibilities.  Thus, in the same move, I have reconquered my being-for-itself through my consciousness (of) myself as a constant center of infinite possibilities, and I have transformed the Other’s possibilities into dead-possibilities by modifying them all with the character of “ not-lived-by-me ,” i.e., of being simply given .  Shame, similarly, is only the original feeling of having my being outside , committed within another being and, as such, without any defense, illuminated by the absolute light that emanates from a pure subject: it is the consciousness of being irremediably what I always was, “suspended,” i.e., in the mode of “not-yet” or “already-more-than.” Pure shame is not the feeling of being this or that reprehensible object but, in general, of being an object , i.e., of recognizing myself in that degraded, dependent, and frozen being that I am for the Other.  Shame is the feeling of an original fall , not in virtue of my having committed this or that misdeed but merely by virtue of having “fallen” into the world, in the midst of things, and of needing the Other’s mediation to be what I am.  Modesty and, in particular, the fear of being surprised in a state of nakedness are only a symbolic specification of original shame: here the body symbolizes our defenseless objecthood.  To get dressed is to disguise one’s objecthood; it is to retrieve the right to see without being seen, which is to be a pure subject.  That is why the biblical symbol of the fall, after the original sin, is the fact that Adam and Eve “know that they are naked.” The reaction to shame will consist precisely in apprehending as an object the one who was apprehending my own objecthood.  In effect, from the moment the Other appears to me as an object his subjectivity becomes a mere property of the object in question.  It becomes degraded and defined as “a set of objective properties that are necessarily hidden from me.” The object-Other “has” a subjectivity in the way in which that empty box has “an inside.” And I thereby retrieve myself: because I cannot be an object for an object .  I do not deny that the Other retains, through his “inside,” a connection with me, but the consciousness that he has of me, as an object-consciousness, appears to me as something purely internal, without efficacy: it is one property among the others of this “inside,” something comparable to an impressionable film in the dark chamber of a camera.  Insofar as I make it the case that there is an Other, I grasp myself as the free source of the knowledge that the Other has of me, and the Other appears to me as affected in his being by this knowledge that he has of my being insofar as I have affected him with the character of the Other.  This knowledge acquires then a subjective character, in the new meaning of “relative”; i.e., it remains in the subject-object as a quality that is relative to the Other-being that I have assigned to him.  It no longer touches me: it is an image in him of me .  In this way subjectivity has become degraded into interiority, free consciousness into a mere absence of principles, possibilities into properties, and the knowledge through which the Other reaches me in my being into a pure image of me in the Other’s “consciousness.” Shame motivates the reaction that surpasses it and eliminates it insofar as it includes within it an implicit and unthematized understanding of the possibility-of-being-an-object of the subject for whom I am an object.  And this implicit understanding is nothing other than the consciousness (of) my “being-myself,” i.e., of my reinforced ipseity.  In effect, in the structure expressed by “I am ashamed of myself,” the shame presupposes a me-object for the other, but also an ipseity that is ashamed, which the “I” in the formula imperfectly expresses.  Thus shame is the unitary apprehension of three dimensions: “ I am ashamed of myself before the Other .” Should one of these dimensions disappear, the shame disappears as well.  If, however, I conceive of the “they” subject before whom I am ashamed insofar as he is unable to become an object without becoming scattered into a plurality of the Other—if I posit him as the absolute unity of the subject that can in no way become an object—I thereby posit the eternity of my object-being and I perpetuate my shame.  That is shame before God, i.e., the recognition of my objecthood before a subject who can never become an object; by the same token I actualize my objecthood in the absolute and I hypostasize it; God’s position is accompanied by a reification of my objecthood.  Better still, I posit my object-being-for-God as more real than my for-itself; I exist alienated and I learn from my outside what I have to be.  That is the origin of fear before God.  Black masses, profanations of the Host, satanic associations, etc., are so many efforts to confer the character of an object on the absolute Subject.  In willing Evil for the sake of Evil, I attempt to contemplate the divine transcendence—whose distinctive possibility is Good—as a transcendence that is purely given, and that I transcend toward Evil.  In that case I “make God suffer,” I “irritate” him, etc.  These endeavors, which imply the absolute recognition of God as the subject who cannot be an object, carry their contradiction within them and are in a state of constant failure.  As for pride, it does not exclude original shame.  It is built even in the territory of fundamental shame, or the shame of being an object.  It is an ambiguous feeling: in pride I recognize the Other as the subject through whom objecthood arrives in my being, but in addition I recognize myself as responsible for my objecthood; I place the emphasis on my responsibility, and I accept it.  In a sense, therefore, pride is in the first instance resignation: in order to be proud of being that , it is necessary for me first to be resigned to being only that .  It is a matter therefore of an initial reaction to shame and it is already a reaction of flight and bad faith because, without ceasing to regard the Other as a subject, I try to apprehend myself as affecting the Other through my objecthood.  In brief, there are two authentic attitudes: the one through which I recognize the Other as the subject through whom I come to objecthood—that is shame; and the one through which I apprehend myself as the free project through which the Other comes to Other-being—that is pride, or the affirmation of my freedom in the face of the object-Other.  But pride—or vanity—is a feeling that lacks equilibrium and is in bad faith: in the case of vanity, I try to act upon the Other insofar as I am an object: I aim to make use of this beauty or strength or intelligence that he confers on me insofar as he constitutes me as an object in order to assign to him, by reversing the direction of flow, a passive feeling of admiration or love.  But in addition I demand that this feeling, as what sanctions my object-being, should be felt by the Other insofar as he is a subject, i.e., as a freedom.  In fact, that is the only way of conferring absolute objectivity upon my strength or my beauty.  Thus the feeling that I demand from the Other bears within itself its own contradiction, since I have to assign it to the Other insofar as he is free.  It is experienced in the mode of bad faith, and its internal development leads it to disintegrate.  In effect, in order to take possession of my object-being that I accept, I try to retrieve it as an object ; and, as the Other is the key to it, I try to seize hold of the Other so that he will deliver to me the secret of my being.  Thus vanity propels me to seize hold of the Other and to constitute him as an object, in order to excavate into the heart of this object and discover my own objecthood in it.  But that is to kill the goose with the golden eggs.  In constituting the Other as an object, I constitute myself as an image at the heart of the object-Other.  Hence the disillusion of vanity: in this image that I wanted to grasp, in order to retrieve it and to merge it into my being, I no longer recognize myself; whether I like it or not, I must impute it to the Other as one of his subjective properties; freed in spite of myself of my objecthood I remain alone in the face of the object-Other, in my unsayable ipseity that I have to be without ever being able to be relieved of my function.  Shame, fear, and pride are therefore my original reactions, they are merely the various ways in which I recognize the Other as a subject out of reach, and they include within themselves an understanding of my ipseity which can and does provide me with the motivation to constitute the Other into an object.  This object-Other that suddenly appears to me does not remain a pure objective abstraction.  He arises before me with his specific meanings.  He is not only the object whose freedom is a property , as a transcended transcendence.  He is also “angry” or “joyful” or “attentive,” “friendly” or “unfriendly,” “greedy,” “bad-tempered,” etc.  That is because, in grasping myself as myself, I make it the case that the object-Other exists in the midst of the world.  I recognize his transcendence, but I recognize it not as a transcending transcendence but as a transcended transcendence.  It appears therefore as a surpassing of implements toward certain ends, to exactly the extent to which I surpass, in a unitary project of myself, these ends, these implements, and this surpassing by the Other of the implements toward the ends.  In fact I never apprehend myself abstractly as the pure possibility of being myself but, instead, I live my ipseity in its concrete projection toward this or that end: I exist only as committed and it is only as such that I am conscious (of) being.  In this capacity I grasp the object-Other only within a concrete and committed surpassing of his transcendence.  But, conversely, the Other’s commitment, which is his mode of being, appears to me insofar as it is transcended by my transcendence as a real commitment, as a rootedness .  In brief, insofar as I exist for-myself , my “commitment” within a situation has to be understood in the sense in which we say “I am committed toward somebody,” “I am committed to returning this money,” etc.  And it is this commitment or engagement that characterizes the subject-Other, since it is another myself.  51 But, when I grasp the Other as an object, this objectified engagement is degraded and becomes an engagement-object, in the sense in which we say “The knife is deeply engaged within the wound” or “The army was engaged within a narrow pass.” It has to be understood indeed that the being-in-the-midst-of-the-world which comes to the Other through me is a real being.  It is not purely a subjective necessity that makes me know him as an existent in the midst of the world.  And yet, on the other hand, the Other has not got lost by himself in this world.  Rather I make him get lost in the midst of the world that is mine, by virtue solely of the fact that he is for me the one that I have to not be, which is to say by virtue solely of the fact that I maintain him outside me as a reality that is purely contemplated and surpassed toward my own ends.  Thus objectivity is not the pure refraction, through my consciousness, of the Other: it comes to the Other through me as a real qualification; I make it the case that the Other is in the midst of the world.  What I grasp therefore as real characteristics of the Other is a being-in-situation: in effect I organize him, in the midst of the world, insofar as he organizes the world toward himself; I grasp him as the objective unity of implements and of obstacles.  We explained in Part Two of this work 52 that the totality of implements is the exact correlative to my possibilities.  As I am my possibilities, the order of implements within the world is the image, projected into the in-itself, of my possibilities, i.e., the image of what I am.  But I can never decipher this worldly image; I adapt to it in and through my action.  The Other, insofar as he is a subject, finds himself similarly committed within his image .  But insofar as I grasp him as an object, on the contrary, it is this worldly image that leaps into sight: the Other becomes the instrument who is defined by his relation with all the other instruments, an ordering of my implements which is enclosed within the order that I impose on these implements.  To grasp the Other is to grasp this enclosed-order and to relate it to a central absence or “interiority”; it is to define this absence as a frozen flowing away of the objects in my world toward a determinate object in my universe.  And the meaning of this flowing away is provided by these objects themselves: it is through the arrangement of the hammer and the nails, of the chisel and the marble, insofar as I surpass this arrangement without being its foundation, that the meaning of this intraworldly hemorrhage is defined.  In this way the world announces the Other to me in his totality, and as a totality.  Of course, the announcement remains ambiguous.  But that is because I grasp the ordering of the world toward the Other as an undifferentiated totality, against whose ground some explicit structures appear.  If I were able to explicate all the structures of equipment insofar as they are turned toward the Other—i.e., if I could grasp not only the place that the hammer and the nails occupy within this structure of equipment but also the street, the town, the nation, etc.—I would have explicitly and completely defined the being of the Other as an object.  If I am mistaken about one of the Other’s intentions, that is absolutely not because I am relating his action to a subjectivity that is out of reach: there is no common measure between this subjectivity, in and by itself, and the movement, because it is a transcendence for itself, a transcendence that cannot be surpassed.  But that is because I organize the entire world around this action differently from the way it is in fact organized.  Thus, by virtue solely of the fact that the Other appears as an object, he is given to me as a matter of principle as a totality; he extends throughout the whole world as a worldly power of synthetically organizing this world.  Only I am no more able to explicate this synthetic organization than I am able to explicate the world itself insofar as it is my world.  And the difference between the subject-Other—i.e., the Other as he is for-himself—and the object-Other is not at all a difference of the whole to the part, or of the hidden to the revealed, because the object-Other is necessarily a whole that is coextensive with the subjective totality; nothing is hidden and, insofar as the objects refer to other objects, I can indefinitely increase my knowledge of the Other, by explicating indefinitely his relations to the other implements in the world; and the ideal of knowledge of the Other remains the exhaustive explication of the meaning of the world’s flowing away.  The difference in principle between the object-Other and the subject-Other stems uniquely from this fact, that the subject-Other can in no way be known or even conceived as such: there is no problem of knowledge of the subject-Other, and the objects in the world do not refer to his subjectivity; they referonly to his objecthood within the world, as the meaning—surpassed toward my ipseity—of the intraworldly flowing away.  In this way, I experience the Other’s presence to me as the maker of my objecthood as a subject-totality; and, if I turn back toward this presence in order to grasp it, I apprehend the Other once again as a totality: an object-totality that is coextensive with the totality of the world.  And this apprehension comes about all at once: it is on the basis of the world in its entirety that I approach the object-Other.  But these are only ever particular relations, which stand out in relief as figures against the world’s ground.  Around this man, unknown to me, and who is reading in the metro, the world in its entirety is present.  And it is not only his body—as an object in the world—that defines him in his being: it is his identity card, the direction of the metro train that he has boarded, and the ring he is wearing on his finger.  These do not function as signs of what he is—that notion of the sign effectively returns us to a subjectivity that I am unable even to conceive and within which, to be exact, there is strictly speaking nothing of him, since he is what he is not and he is not what he is—but as real characteristics of his being.  However, if I know that he is in the midst of the world (in France, in Paris, and doing some reading), I can only, for want of seeing his identity card, suppose that he is a foreigner (which means: suppose him to be subject to inspection, that he figures on such and such a list in the Prefecture, that it is necessary to speak to him in Dutch, or in Italian, in order to obtain this or that action from him, that the international post travels toward him by this or that route taken by the letters, which carry this or that stamp, etc.).  However, this identity card is necessarily given to me in the midst of the world.  It doesn’t escape me—from the moment it was created, it began to exist for me.  Only it exists implicitly, like each point of the circle that I see as a completed figure, and, to make it appear as an explicit this against the ground of the universe, it would be necessary to change the present totality of my relations to the world.  In the same way, the anger of the object-Other—as it is manifested to me through his shouting, his foot stamping, and his threatening gestures—is not the sign of a subjective and hidden anger: it refers to nothing, only to other gestures and other shouting.  It defines the Other; it is the Other.  Of course I may be wrong, and take what is only a feigned irritation to be a true fit of anger.  But I can go wrong only in relation to other movements and other actions that can be objectively grasped: I go wrong if I grasp the hand’s movement as a real intention to strike.  In other words, I go wrong if I interpret it in terms of a movement that can be objectively discerned, and which will not occur.  In brief, anger that is objectively apprehended is an arrangement of the world around an intraworldly presence-absence.  Does this mean the behaviorists were right? Definitely not: because if the behaviorists interpret man on the basis of his situation, they have lost sight of his principal characteristic, which is transcendence-transcended.  The Other is in fact the object that cannot be limited to itself, an object that can be understood only in terms of its end.  And, doubtless, the hammer and the saw are not understood differently.  Both of them are grasped through their function, i.e., through their end.  But that is just because they are already human.  I can understand them only insofar as they refer me to an implement-organization whose center is the Other, insofar as they form part of a structure that is entirely transcended toward an end that I transcend in my turn.  If therefore the Other can be compared to a machine, it is insofar as the machine, as a human fact, already presents the trace of a transcended-transcendence, insofar as the looms, in a spinning mill, can be explained only through the fabrics that they produce; the behaviorist point of view has to be reversed and, moreover, this reversal will leave the Other’s objectivity intact, because what is objective in the first instance—whether we call it “meaning,” in the style of the French and English psychologists, “intention,” in the style of phenomenologists, “transcendence,” like Heidegger, or “figure,” like the Gestaltists—is the fact that the Other cannot be defined other than through a totalizing organization of the world, and that he is the key to this organization.  If therefore, in order to define him, I move back from the world to the Other, that is not because the world will make me understand the Other but rather because the Other-object is nothing but an autonomous and intraworldly center of reference in my world.  In this way, the objective fear that we can apprehend when we perceive the object-Other is not the set of physiological manifestations of disarray that we can see, or that we can measure with the blood pressure gauge or the stethoscope: fear is the flight, the fainting.  And these phenomena themselves are not delivered to us purely as a series of movements but as a transcended-transcendence: the flight or the fainting is not only this distraught running across the brambles, or this heavy fall onto the stones of the path; it is a total upheaval in the implement-organization whose center was the Other.  A moment ago, this soldier in flight had the enemy-Other at the end of his rifle.  The distance from the enemy to him was measured by the trajectory of his bullet, and it was possible for me, as well, to grasp and to transcend this distance as a distance that was organized around the “soldier” center.  But now he throws his rifle into the ditch and runs away.  Immediately, the presence of the enemy surrounds him and presses in on him; the enemy, who had been held at a distance by the bullets’ trajectory, leaps on him, in the very instant in which the trajectory collapses; at the same time, this hinterland that he was defending and which he had been leaning against like a wall suddenly turns round, opens up into a fan and becomes what is in front of him, the welcoming horizon in whose direction he takes refuge.  I take note of all of that objectively, and what I apprehend as fear is precisely that .  Fear is nothing but a magical behavior, which aims to eliminate by incantation the terrifying objects that we are unable to hold at a distance.  53 And it is precisely through its results that we apprehend fear, for it is given to us as a new type of intraworldly hemorrhage of the world: the transition of the world into a type of magical existence.  However, we must take note that the Other is only a qualified object for me to the extent that I can be that for him.  He will become objectified therefore as a non-individualized piece of the “they,” or as “absent,” represented purely by his letters and his tales, or as this-person-here , present in fact, depending on whether I have myself been for him an element of the “they,” or an “absent friend,” or a concrete this-person-here .  What decides in each case the type of objectification of the Other and his qualities is at the same time my situation in the world and his situation, i.e., the equipmental structures which we have each organized and the different thises that appear to each of us against the ground of the world.  All this leads us back, naturally, to facticity.  It is my facticity and the Other’s facticity that decide whether the Other can see me, and if I can see that Other.  But the problem of facticity is outside the scope of this general exposition: we will consider it in the course of the next chapter.  Thus, in my being-an-object-for-the-Other, I experience the Other’s presence as a quasi-totality of subjects, and against the ground of this totality I am able to experience more particularly the presence of a concrete subject, without always being able to specify it as this Other.  My defensive reaction to my objecthood will summon the Other before me in the capacity of this or that object .  In this capacity he will appear to me as a “this one,” which is to say that his subjective quasi-totality is degraded and becomes an object-totality coextensive to the totality of the world.  This totality is revealed to me without reference to the Other’s subjectivity: the relation between the subject-Other and the object-Other is not comparable at all to the one that we are accustomed to establishing, for example, between the object of physics and the object of perception.  The object-Other is revealed to me for what he is ; he refers only to himself.  Only the object-Other is as he appears to me, on the level of objecthood in general and in his object-being; it is not even conceivable that I could relate some piece of knowledge that I have of him to his subjectivity, such as I experience it on the occasion of the look.  The object-Other is only an object, but my apprehension of him includes the understanding that I will always be able, as a matter of principle, to have a different experience of him by placing myself at another level of being; this understanding is constituted, on the one hand, by the knowledge of my past experience, which is moreover, as we have seen, the pure past (out of reach, and as what I have to be) of this experience and, on the other hand, by an implicit apprehension of the dialectic of the other: the other is presently what I am making myself not to be.  But, even though for the instant I have got rid of him, and escape him, there remains around him the permanent possibility that he will make himself other.  However, this possibility, which is sensed with a kind of discomfort and constraint that is what distinguishes my attitude in the face of the object-Other, is strictly speaking inconceivable: in the first place because I am unable to conceive of a possibility that is not my possibility, or to apprehend a transcendence except by transcending it, i.e., by grasping it as a transcended transcendence; then, because this possibility that I sense is not the object-Other’s possibility; the object-Other’s possibilities are dead-possibilities, which refer to other objective aspects of the Other; as the distinctive possibility of grasping myself as an object is the possibility of the subject-Other, it is not actually for me anybody’s possibility: it is the absolute possibility—which draws its source only from itself—of a subject-Other’s arising, against the ground of the object-Other’s complete annihilation, which I will experience through my objectivity-for-him.  Thus the object-other is an explosive instrument that I handle with apprehension, because I sense the constant possibility around him that they will make it explode and that, with this explosion, I will suddenly experience outside me the world’s flight and the alienation of my being.  My constant concern therefore is to contain the Other within his objectivity, and my relations with the object-Other are essentially made up of ruses whose intention is to make him remain as an object.  But a look from the Other suffices to make all these artifices collapse and for me to experience once again the Other’s transfiguration.  In this way I am sent back from transfiguration into degradation, and from degradation to transfiguration without ever being able to form a view of these two modes of the Other’s being together—because each one of them is sufficient to itself and refers only to itself—or to hold firmly to one of them—because each one has its own instability, and collapses in order that the Other will arise on its ruins.  It is only the dead who are able constantly to be objects without ever becoming subjects, because to die is not to lose one’s objectivity in the midst of the world—all of the dead are there, in the world, around us—but to lose any possibility of being revealed as a subject to an Other.  At this level of our investigation, once we have elucidated the essential structures of being-for-the-Other, we are tempted, evidently, to raise the metaphysical question: “Why are there Others?” As we have seen, the existence of others is not in effect a consequence that flows from the for-itself’s ontological structure.  It is of course a primordial event, but of a metaphysical order, which is to say that it has to do with the contingency of being.  It is essentially in relation to these metaphysical existences that the question of the “why” arises.  Besides, we know that the answer to the “why” can direct us only to an original contingency, but we still need to prove that the metaphysical phenomenon that we are examining is irreducibly contingent.  In this sense, it seems to us that it ought to be possible to define “ontology” as the explication of the structures of being of the existent, taken as a totality, and we will define “metaphysics” instead as the putting into question of the existence of the existent.  That is why, in virtue of the existent’s absolute contingency, we are assured that any metaphysics must end with a “that is,” i.e., by a direct intuition of this contingency.  Is it possible to raise the question of the existence of others? Is this question an irreducible fact or ought it to be derived from a fundamental contingency? These are the preliminary questions that we can raise in turn to the metaphysician who raises questions about the existence of others.  Let us examine the possibility of the metaphysical question more closely.  What appears to us first is that being-for-the-Other represents the for-itself’s third ecstasis.  The first ecstasis is in fact the for-itself’s three-dimensional project toward a being that it has to be in the mode of not-being.  It represents the first fissure, the nihilation that the for-itself has itself to be, the for-itself’s separation from everything that is, insofar as this separating is constitutive of its being.  The second ecstasis—or the reflective ecstasis—is a separation from that very separation.  The reflective scissiparity corresponds to a futile effort to take up a point of view on the nihilation that the for-itself has to be, in order that this nihilation, as a phenomenon that is simply given, should be a nihilation that is .  But at the same time the reflection wants to retrieve this separating which it is attempting to contemplate as a pure given by affirming, in relation to itself, that it is this nihilation that is.  The contradiction is flagrant: in order to be able to grasp my transcendence, it would be necessary for me to transcend it.  But, precisely, my own transcendence is able only to transcend; I am it, and cannot make use of it in order to constitute it as a transcended transcendence; I am condemned constantly to be my own nihilation.  In brief, the reflection is the reflected.  However, the nihilation of reflection is more extreme than that of the pure for-itself as simple consciousness (of) self.  In effect, in the consciousness (of) self, the incapacity of the two terms of the reflected-reflecting duality to present themselves separately was such that the duality remained constantly evanescent, so that each term, in positing itself for the other, became the other.  But in the case of reflection the process is different, since the reflected “reflection-reflecting” exists for a reflective “reflection-reflecting.” 54 The reflected and the reflecting therefore each reach toward independence, and the nothing that separates them tends to divide them more deeply than the nothingness that the for-itself has to be separates the reflection from the reflecting.  However, neither the reflective nor the reflected is able to secrete this separating nothingness; otherwise the reflection would be an autonomous for-itself, entering in to target what is reflected, which would presuppose an external negation as the precondition of an internal negation.  There can be no reflection unless it is entirely a being , a being that has to be its own nothingness.  Thus the reflective ecstasis is located on the path toward a more radical ecstasis: being-for-the-Other.  The ultimate term of the nihilation, the ideal pole, ought in fact to be an external negation (i.e., an in-itself scissiparity) or a spatial, indifferent externality.  In relation to this external negation, the three ecstases are ranked in the order that we have just set out, but they can in no way attain it; it remains necessarily ideal.  In effect, the for-itself cannot on its own actualize, in relation to some being, a negation that is in itself, without ceasing by the same token to be-for-itself.  The constitutive negation of being-for-the-Other is therefore an internal negation ; it is a nihilation that the for-itself has to be, just like the reflective nihilation.  But here the scissiparity attacks the negation itself: it is no longer only the negation that splits the being into two—the reflected and the reflecting—and, in its turn, splits the reflected-reflecting pair into the (reflected-reflecting) reflected and the (reflected-reflecting) reflecting.  Rather, the negation splits into two internal and opposite negations, each of which is an internal negation and yet is separated from the other by an elusive external negation.  In effect, since each negation is consumed in denying, in relation to one for-itself, that it is the other, and is entirely committed within this being that it has to be, it has no more of itself available with which to deny, in relation to itself, that it is the opposite negation.  Here, all of a sudden, the given appears, not as the result of an identity of being-in-itself but as a kind of phantom externality that neither of the two negations has to be, and yet which separates them.  In truth, we could already find the beginning of the negative inversion in reflective being.  In effect, the reflective, as witness, is profoundly affected in its being by its reflexivity and consequently, insofar as it makes itself reflective, it aims not to be the reflected.  But, inversely, the reflected is a consciousness (of) self as the reflected consciousness of this or that transcendent phenomenon.  What we said about it was that it knows itself to be looked at.  In this sense, it aims on its part to not be the reflective, since every consciousness is defined by its negativity.  But this tendency toward a twofold schism was reclaimed and stifled by the fact that, in spite of everything, the reflective had the reflected to be, and the reflected had the reflective to be.  The twofold negation remained evanescent.  In the case of the third ecstasis, it is as if we are in the presence of a more extreme reflective scissiparity.  The consequences may surprise us: on the one hand, since the negations are effected internally, neither the Other nor I myself is able to approach each other from the outside.  It is necessary for there to be an “Other-me” being , which has the reciprocal scissiparity of the for-the-Other to be, just as the “reflective-reflected” totality is a being that has its own nothingness to be, which is to say that my ipseity and that of the Other are structures within one same totality of being.  Thus Hegel appears to be right: it is the viewpoint of the totality that is the viewpoint of being, the true point of view.  Everything happens as if my ipseity in the face of the Other’s was produced and maintained by a totality that could press its own nihilation to the extreme; being for the Other appears to be the prolongation of the pure scissiparity of reflection.  In this sense, everything happens as if we—the others and myself—were registering the futile effort of a totality of the for-itself to seize itself back and to envelop what it has to be in the pure and simple mode of the in-itself: this endeavor to seize hold of itself as an object, taken here to the limit—i.e., far beyond the reflective scission—would bring about the opposite result to the end toward which this totality projects itself: through its endeavor to be a consciousness of itself  soi , the for-itself-totality would constitute itself in the face of the “itself”  soi  as a consciousness-itself that has not to be the itself  soi  of which it is conscious; and conversely, in order to be , the object-itself would have to experience itself as been by and for a consciousness that it has not to be, if it wants to be.  55 In this way the schism of the for-itself is born; and this dichotomous division will repeat itself to infinity, to constitute the consciousness es as the smithereens of a radical explosion.  “There would be” some others , in consequence of a failure that is the opposite of the failure of reflection.  If, in effect, I do not manage to apprehend myself as an object in reflection but only as a quasi-object, it is because I am the object that I want to apprehend; I have the nothingness that separates me from myself to be; I cannot escape my ipseity, nor can I take up a point of view on myself; in this way, I do not manage to actualize myself as being, or to grasp myself in the form “there is”; my retrieval fails because the retrieving part stands in relation to itself as what is retrieved.  In the case of being-for-the-Other, on the contrary, the scissiparity is taken further; the reflected (reflection-reflecting) is radically distinguished from the reflecting (reflection-reflecting) and by that very fact it can be an object for it.  But this time the retrieval fails because what is retrieved is not what does the retrieving.  Thus the totality that is not what it is, while being what it is not, through a radical endeavor to separate itself from itself, produces its being everywhere as an “elsewhere:” the flickering being-in-itself of a broken totality, always elsewhere, always at a distance, never in itself, yet always maintained in being by this totality’s constant explosion; such is the being of others, and the being of myself as other.  But on the other hand, simultaneously with my negation of myself, the Other denies in relation to himself that he is me.  These two negations are equally indispensable to being-for-the-Other, and there is no synthesis that can bring them together.  That is not because an external nothingness has separated them at the origin but rather because the in-itself would seize each one back in relation to the other, by virtue solely of the fact that each one is not the other, without having to not be it.  Here there is something like a limit to the for-itself which comes from the for-itself itself but which, insofar as it is a limit, is independent of the for-itself: we rediscover something like facticity and we are unable to conceive how the totality that we were discussing earlier can have produced in its being, right at the heart of the most radical movement of separation, a nothingness that it has in no way to be.  It seems in effect that it has slipped within this totality in order to break it, as non-being, in Leucippus’s atomism, slides within Parmenides’s totality of being in order to make it explode into atoms.  56 It represents therefore the negation of every synthetic totality on whose basis one might claim to understand the plurality of consciousnesses.  Doubtless it is elusive, since it is produced neither by the other nor by myself, nor by an intermediary, for we have established that the consciousnesses experience each other without intermediary.  Doubtless, no matter where we direct our gaze, we will encounter as an object of description only a pure and simple internal negation.  And yet it is there, in the irreducible fact of there being a duality of negations.  It is certainly not the foundation of the multiplicity of consciousnesses, because if it preexisted this multiplicity it would make any being-for the Other impossible; we must on the contrary conceive it as the expression of this multiplicity: it appears with it.  But as there is nothing that is able to found it, neither a particular consciousness, nor a totality exploding into consciousnesses, it appears as pure and irreducible contingency, as the fact that my denying the Other in relation to myself does not suffice to make the Other exist, but it is necessary in addition for the Other to deny me in relation to himself simultaneously with my own negation .  That is the facticity of being-for-the-Other.  Thus we arrive at this contradictory conclusion: being-for-the-Other can only be if it is been by a totality that loses itself in order for it to arise: this might lead us to postulate the existence and passion of spirit .  57 But, on the other hand, this being-for-the-Other can exist only if it brings with it an elusive external non-being, which no totality, not even spirit , is able to produce or to found.  In one sense, the existence of a plurality of consciousnesses cannot be a basic fact, and it directs us to an original fact of a self-separation which is the fact of spirit; in this way, the metaphysical question “Why are there some consciousnesses?” receives a reply.  But, in another sense, the facticity of this plurality seems to be irreducible, and if we consider spirit on the basis of the fact of the plurality, it vanishes; the metaphysical question no longer has meaning, we have encountered fundamental contingency, and we can reply to it only by saying: “That is how it is.” In this way the original ecstasis is deepened: we seem unable to give nothingness its due.  The for-itself has appeared to us as a being that exists insofar as it is not what it is and it is what it is not.  The ecstatic totality of spirit is not simply a detotalized totality, but it appears to us as a broken being about which we are unable to say either that it exists or that it does not exist.  Thus our description has enabled us to satisfy the preliminary conditions that we placed on any theory of the Other’s existence: the multiplicity of consciousnesses appears to us as a synthesis and not as a collection ; but it is a synthesis whose totality is inconceivable.  Does that amount to saying that this antinomic character of the totality is itself irreducible? Or will we be able to make it disappear, from some higher point of view? Ought we to posit that spirit is the being that is and is not , as we have posited that the for-itself is what it is not and is not what it is? The question has no meaning.  It would presuppose in effect that it is possible for us to take up a point of view on the totality, i.e., to consider it from outside.  But that is impossible, since, precisely, I exist as myself on the foundation of this totality, and to the extent that I am committed within it.  No consciousness, not even God’s, is able “to see the reverse side,” i.e., to grasp the totality as such.  For, if God is a consciousness, he is included in the totality.  And if by his nature he is a being beyond consciousness —i.e., an in-itself that could be its own foundation—the totality can appear to him only as an object , in which case its internal disaggregation, qua the subjective endeavor to seize back the self, is missing, or as a subject , and, in this case, as he is not this subject, he is able only to experience it without knowing it.  In this way it is impossible to conceive of any point of view on the totality: the totality has no “outside,” and even the question of the meaning of its “reverse side” lacks meaning.  We can go no further.  Here we have reached the end of this exposition.  We have learned that the Other’s existence is experienced with evidence, in and through the fact of my objectivity.  And we have also seen that my reaction to my own alienation for the Other is conveyed through the apprehension of the Other as an object.  In short, the Other can exist for us in two forms: if I experience him with evidence, I fail to know him; if I know him, if I act on him, I reach only his object-being and his probable existence in the midst of the world: no synthesis of these two forms is possible.  But we cannot stop here: this object that the Other is for me and this object that I am for the Other are manifested as bodies .  What therefore is my body? What is the Other’s body? Chapter 3: Concrete Relations with the Other Chapter 3 GT401 CONCRETE RELATIONS WITH THE OTHER So far we have only described our fundamental relationship with the Other.  This relation has allowed us to explicate the three dimensions of the being of our body.  And although our original relation to the Other is primary (in comparison to the relation of my body to the Other’s body, it has become clear to us that some knowledge of the nature of the body is indispensable for any study of the specific relations between my being and that of the Other.  In fact these latter presuppose facticity, on both sides, i.e., our existence as a body in the midst of the world.  It is not that the body is the instrument and cause of my relations with the Other.  But it constitutes their meaning, and it marks out their limits: it is as a body-in-situation that I apprehend the Other’s transcended-transcendence and it is as a body-in-situation that I experience myself, as alienated for the Other’s benefit.  Now that we know what our body is, we are able to examine these concrete relations.  They are not mere specifications of the fundamental relation; although each of them includes the original relation to the Other within it, as its essential structure and foundation, they are entirely new modes of being of the for-itself.  In fact they represent the various attitudes of the for-itself in a world in which there are others.  Each of them, therefore, presents in its own way the bilateral relation: for-itself-for-the-Other, in-itself.  If, therefore, we succeed in explicating the structures of our most basic relations with the-other-in-the-world, we will have completed our task; in fact, our question at the beginning of this work concerned the for-itself’s relations with the in-itself; but we have learned now that our task was more complex; the for-itself’s relation with the in-itself is in the other’s presence .  When we have described that concrete fact, we will be in a position to draw conclusions about the fundamental relations between these three modes of being—and perhaps we can start to construct a metaphysical theory of being in general.  The for-itself as nihilation of the in-itself temporalizes itself as flight toward .  In effect, it surpasses its facticity—or its being given , or its past, or its body—toward the in-itself that it would be if it were able to be its own foundation.  This could be put into terms that are more psychological—and that are, for this reason, incorrect, even if they are perhaps clearer—by saying that the for-itself tries to escape its de facto existence, in other words its being-there, as an in-itself of which it is not in any way the foundation, and that this flight takes place toward an impossible and constantly pursued future where the for-itself might be in-itself-for-itself, i.e., an in-itself that would be its own foundation in relation to itself.  Thus the for-itself is at the same time a flight and a pursuit; at the same time it flees the in-itself and it pursues it; the for-itself is a pursuing-pursued.  But—to reduce the danger of a psychological interpretation of the preceding remarks—we should remember that the for-itself does not exist first , in order subsequently to try to attain to being: in short, we should not conceive of it as an existent that could be endowed with tendencies, as this glass is endowed with certain specific qualities.  This flight in pursuit is not a given that is added on to the for-itself’s being as an extra: rather, the for-itself is this very flight; it cannot be distinguished from the original nihilation; to say that the for-itself is pursuing-pursued, or that it is in the mode of having its being to be, or that it is not what it is and it is what it is not, amounts to one and the same thing.  The for-itself is not, and cannot be, the in-itself, but it is the relation to the in-itself; it is even the only possible relation to the in-itself.  Surrounded at all sides by the in-itself, the for-itself escapes it only because it is nothing , and separated from it by nothing .  The for-itself is the foundation of all negativity and all relation: it is the relation .  This being so, the Other, in arising, reaches right to the heart of the for-itself.  Through and for the other, the pursuing flight is frozen into in-itself.  Already being constantly seized back by the in-itself, the for-itself was at the same time already a radical negation of fact, an absolute positing of value—and, at the same time, penetrated by facticity throughout.  At least it escaped through its temporalization; at least its character as a detotalized totality conferred on it a perpetual “elsewhere.” But it is this very totality that the Other summons up before him, and transcends toward his own “elsewhere.” It is this totality that is totalized: for the Other, I am irremediably what I am, and my freedom itself is a property added to my being.  Thus the in-itself seizes me back even into the future and freezes me entirely in my very flight—which becomes a foreseen and contemplated flight, a given flight.  But this frozen flight is never the flight that I am for myself: it is frozen out there .  I experience this objectivity of my flight as an alienation that I can neither transcend nor know.  And yet, by the mere fact that I experience it, and that it bestows on my flight this in-itself that it is fleeing from, I am obliged to turn back toward it and take up an attitude in relation to it.  Such is the origin of my concrete relations with the Other; they are governed entirely by the attitudes that I take up toward the object that I am for the Other.  And as the Other’s existence reveals to me the being that I am, without my being able either to appropriate this being or even to conceive of it, this existence motivates two opposing attitudes: the Other looks at me and, in so doing, he holds the secret of my being; he knows what I am .  Thus the innermost meaning of my being is outside me, imprisoned in an absence; the Other has the advantage over me.  I can try, therefore, insofar as I flee from the in-itself that I am without being its foundation, to negate this being that is bestowed on me from outside; in other words, I can turn back toward the Other to confer objecthood on him in my turn, since the Other’s objecthood destroys my objectivity for the Other.  But, on the other hand, and insofar as the Other in his freedom founds my being-in-itself, I can try to retrieve this freedom and to take hold of it without taking its character of freedom away from it: if I were able, in effect, to assimilate this freedom that founds my being-in-itself, I would be, in relation to myself, my own foundation.  These are the two basic attitudes that I take up in relation to the Other: transcending the Other’s transcendence or, on the contrary, swallowing up this transcendence within me without taking away its character of transcendence.  And, here again, we should interpret these words with care: it is not at all true that, in the first place, I am, and that, thereafter, I “try” to objectify or to assimilate the Other; rather, to the extent that my being arises in the Other’s presence, to the extent that I am a pursuing flight and a pursuing-pursued, I am, in the very root of my being, a pro-ject of objectification or assimilation of the Other.  I undergo the Other: that is the original fact.  But this undergoing of the Other is in itself an attitude toward the Other, which is to say that I can be in the presence of the Other without this “in the presence of” taking the form of having it to be.  Thus we are still describing structures of the for-itself’s being, even though the Other’s presence in the world is an absolute fact, evidenced by itself, but contingent, i.e., something that is impossible to deduce from the ontological structures of the for-itself.  Each of these two attempts that I am is opposed to the other.  Each one of them is the other’s death, which means the failure of one of them motivates the adoption of the other.  In this way my relations toward the Other are not dialectical but circular—even though each attempt is enriched by the other’s failure.  So we will study each of them in turn.  But we should take note that, in the depths of each one, the other always remains present, precisely because neither of them can be maintained without contradiction.  Better still, each attempt lies within the other, and gives rise to the death of the other; thus we can never get out of the circle.  We should not lose sight of the present observations as we set about studying these fundamental attitudes toward the Other.  As these attitudes produce and destroy each other in a circle, it is equally arbitrary whether we begin with one or begin with the other.  However, as we are obliged to choose, we will consider first the behavior by which the for-itself attempts to assimilate the Other’s freedom.  I.  OUR FIRST ATTITUDE TOWARD THE OTHER: LOVE, LANGUAGE, MASOCHISM Everything that is true of me is true of the Other.  While I attempt to free myself from the Other’s hold, the Other tries to free himself from mine; while I try to enslave the Other, the Other tries to enslave me.  The relations we are concerned with here are not at all unilateral relations to an object-in-itself but reciprocal and shifting relationships.  The following descriptions should therefore be envisaged within the perspective of conflict .  Conflict is the original meaning of being-for-the-Other.  If we set out from the Other’s initial revelation as the look , we are obliged to acknowledge that we experience our elusive being-for-the-Other in the form of a possession .  I am possessed by the Other; the Other’s look models my body in its nudity, gives birth to it, sculpts it, produces it as it is , sees it as I will never see it.  The Other holds a secret: the secret of what I am.  He makes me be and, in so doing, he possesses me—and this possession is nothing other than his consciousness of possessing me.  As for me, in recognizing my objecthood, I feel that he has this consciousness.  As a consciousness, the Other is for me at the same time someone who has stolen my being, and someone who brings it about that “there is” a being that is my being.  Thus I have some understanding of this ontological structure; I am responsible for my being-for-the-Other but I am not its foundation; it appears to me, therefore, in the form of a contingent datum for which I am nonetheless responsible, and the Other founds my being insofar as this being takes the form of the “there is”; but even though he founds it in the entirety of his freedom—in and through his free transcendence—he is not responsible for it.  Thus, to the extent that I am disclosed to myself as responsible for my being, I claim this being that I am; i.e., I want to retrieve it or, in more precise terms, I am the project to retrieve my being.  I want to stretch out my hand to lay hold of this being that is appresented to me as my being , but at a distance, like Tantalus’s meal, and to found it by my particular freedom.  That is because if—in one sense—my object-being is intolerably contingent and a pure “possession” of me by another, this being is—in another sense—like an indication of what I have to retrieve and to found, in order to be the foundation of myself.  But this is conceivable only if I can assimilate the Other’s freedom.  In this way, my project to reclaim myself is fundamentally a project to reabsorb the other.  However, my project must leave intact the other’s nature.  This means: (1) In order to do this, I do not stop affirming the Other, i.e., denying, in relation to myself, that I am the other: as the foundation of my being, the other cannot become diluted in me without my being-for-the-Other vanishing.  If therefore I am planning to actualize my unity with the Other, that means I plan to assimilate the other’s alterity as such, as my own possibility.  My aim, in effect, is to make myself be by acquiring the possibility of taking up the other’s point of view on myself.  But this, however, is not a matter of acquiring a pure abstract faculty of knowledge.  My project is not to appropriate the pure category of the other: that category is neither conceived of, nor even able to be conceived.  But, in the circumstance of the concrete experience—suffered and felt—of the other, it is this concrete other as an absolute reality whom I want to incorporate in his alterity.  (2) The other whom I want to assimilate is not at all the object-other.  Or—alternatively—my project to incorporate the other does not in the least correspond to a seizing back of my for-itself as myself, and a surpassing of the Other’s transcendence toward my own possibilities.  My concern is not to erase my objectivity by objectifying the other—which would amount to my delivering myself from my being-for-the-Other—but, quite to the contrary, it is as an other-who-looks that I wish to assimilate the other, and this project of assimilation involves an increased recognition of my being-looked-at.  In brief, I identify myself completely with my being-looked-at in order to maintain before me the other’s looking freedom and, as my object-being is the only possible relation between me and the other, this object-being is the only instrument I can use to bring about the assimilation of the other freedom with myself.  Thus, in reaction to the failure of the third ecstasis , the for-itself wants to identify itself with the Other’s freedom, in its founding of its being-in-itself.  To be an Other to oneself—the ideal that is always concretely aimed at in the form of being this Other to oneself—is the primary value in our relations with the Other; my being-for-the-Other, therefore, is haunted by the indication of an absolute-being, able to be itself insofar as it is other, and to be other insofar as it is itself, and which, in freely giving itself its self-being as other and its other-being as self, might instantiate the very being of the ontological proof, i.e., God.  This ideal can be achieved only if I overcome the original contingency of my relations to the Other, i.e., the fact of there being no relationship of internal negativity between the negation through which the Other establishes himself as other from me and the negation through which I establish myself as other from the other.  We have seen that this contingency is insurmountable: it is the fact of my relations with the Other, just as my body is the fact of my being-in-the-world.  Unity with the Other is therefore unrealizable in fact.  And it is also unrealizable de jure , because the assimilation of the for-itself and the Other within a single act of transcendence would lead necessarily to the disappearance of the Other’s character of alterity.  Thus, the condition of my planning to identify myself with the Other is that I persist in denying, in relation to myself, that I am the other.  In short, this project of unification is a source of conflict , since, while I experience myself as an object for the Other and plan to assimilate him in and through this experience, the Other apprehends me as an object in the midst of the world and does not remotely plan to assimilate me to himself.  What would be required therefore—since my being for the Other involves a double internal negation—would be to act on the internal negation through which the Other transcends my transcendence and makes me exist for the other, i.e., to act on the Other’s freedom .  This unrealizable ideal, insofar as it haunts my project for myself in the presence of the Other, cannot be equated with love, insofar as love is an enterprise, i.e., an organic set of projects concerning my own possibilities.  But it is love’s ideal, its motivation and its goal, the value that belongs to it.  Love as a basic relation to the Other is the set of projects through which I aim to realize this value.  1 These projects place me in a direct relation with the Other’s freedom.  It is in this sense that love is conflict.  We have noted that the Other’s freedom is, in effect, the foundation of my being.  But, precisely because I exist through the Other’s freedom, I lack all security, and I am in danger in that freedom; it molds my being and makes me be ; it confers values upon me and withdraws them; and, from that freedom, my being receives a constant, passive escaping from itself.  Irresponsible and out of reach, this protean freedom in which I have become committed can commit me in its turn in a thousand different ways of being.  My project to reclaim my being can be fulfilled only if I take hold of that freedom and reduce it to being a freedom that submits to my freedom.  At the same time, it is the only way in which I can act upon the free internal negation through which the other constitutes me as another, i.e., through which I can prepare the ground for the other’s future identification with me.  This will perhaps become clearer if we reflect on this problem, which is apparently purely psychological: Why does the lover want to be loved ? If in fact love were merely the desire for physical possession, it could, in many cases, be easily satisfied.  For example, Proust’s hero, who installs his mistress in his home, who can see and possess her at every hour of the day, and has managed to make her totally dependent materially, ought to be free of trouble.  However, we know that he is, on the contrary, eaten up by worry.  It is through her consciousness that Albertine escapes from Marcel, even when he is at her side, and that is why the only respite he can have is when he contemplates her while she sleeps.  It is certain therefore that love wants to captivate “consciousness.” But why does it want this? And how? The concept of “property,” which is used so often to explain love, cannot in fact be central.  Why should I want to appropriate the Other, if not precisely because the Other makes me be? But that implies, precisely, a specific mode of appropriation: it is the other’s freedom as such that we want to seize.  Not through will to power: the tyrant does not care about love; he is content with fear.  If he seeks the love of his subjects it is for political reasons and, if he can find a more economic way of subjugating them, he will adopt it at once.  Contrary to this, the person who wants to be loved does not desire to subjugate the being he loves.  He does not want to become the object of a boundless, mechanical passion.  He does not want to possess an automatism, and if you want to humiliate him, you need only portray for him his loved one’s passion as the outcome of psychological determinism: the lover will feel devalued in his love and his being.  If Tristan and Isolde are driven wild by a love potion, they become less interesting—and it can happen that the total subjugation of the being he loves kills the lover’s love.  His goal has been overshot: if the loved one is transformed into an automaton, the lover finds himself on his own.  Thus the lover does not desire to possess his loved one in the way we can possess a thing: he demands a special type of appropriation.  He wants to possess a freedom as freedom.  But, on the other hand, he could not be satisfied by that preeminent form of freedom that consists in a free and voluntary commitment.  Who could be happy with a love that presented itself purely as a loyalty to a sworn faith? Who, then, would accept someone’s saying “I love you because I have freely committed myself to love you, and I do not want to go back on my word: I love you out of fidelity to myself?” Thus the lover demands an oath, and is irritated by the oath.  He wants to be loved by a freedom, and demands that this freedom, as freedom, should no longer be free.  He wants the other’s freedom to determine itself by itself to become love—and not only at the start of the adventure but at every instant—and he wants, at the same time, this freedom to be captivated by itself ; he wants it to turn back on itself—as in madness, or a dream—in order to will its own captivity.  And this captivity must be an act of resignation that is at the same time both free and shackled between our hands.  What we desire from the Other in love is neither a determinism of the passions nor a freedom beyond reach but a freedom that plays at being determined by passion, and that gets caught in its own game.  2 And, for himself, the lover does not demand to be the cause of this radical modification of freedom but to be its unique and favored occasion.  Indeed, he could not want to be its cause without immediately plunging the loved one into the midst of the world, like a tool that can be transcended.  That is not the essence of love.  In love, on the contrary, the lover wants to be “everything in the world” for his beloved, which is to say that he places himself alongside the world.  He will sum up and symbolize the world: he is a this that includes all other thises ; he is, and agrees to be, an object .  But, on the other hand, he wants to be the object in which the Other’s freedom agrees to lose itself, the object in which the Other agrees to find something like a second facticity, her being and her raison d’être : the object that limits transcendence, the object toward which the Other’s transcendence transcends all other objects—but that cannot be transcended in any way.  And, throughout, he desires the circle of the Other’s freedom; in other words he desires, at every moment, in the acceptance, by the Other’s freedom of this limit to her transcendence, that this acceptance should already be present, as the motive of the acceptance in question.  It is as an end that has already been chosen that he wants to be chosen as an end.  This allows us to grasp what it is that the lover fundamentally demands of the loved one: he does not want to act on the other’s freedom but to exist a priori as this freedom’s objective limit, i.e., to be given in a single stroke alongside it, even as it arises, as the limit that freedom must accept in order to be free.  In virtue of this, what the lover demands of the Other’s freedom is that it should become thickened, and become bogged down: this structural limit is in effect a given , and the mere appearance of the given as the limit of freedom means that the freedom makes itself exist within that given, while prohibiting itself from surpassing it.  And the lover regards this prohibition at the same time as something lived through, i.e., as something undergone (in a word, as facticity) and, at the same time, as freely consented to.  It must be capable of being freely consented to, since it has to belong to the arising of a freedom that chooses itself as freedom.  But it must be merely lived through, since it has to be an ever present impossibility, a facticity that flows back right into the heart of the Other’s freedom; and this is psychologically expressed in the demand that the free decision to love me, which the loved one has previously taken, should slide like a spellbinding motive inside her present free commitment.  We can now grasp the meaning of this demand: that facticity, which must—in my demand to be loved—be a de facto limit for the Other, and which must end up by being her own facticity, is my facticity.  It is insofar as I am the object which the Other brings into being that I must be the inherent limit of her transcendence itself, so that the Other, as she arises to being, makes me exist as the absolute, the unsurpassable—not as a nihilating for-itself but as being-for-the-Other-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  In this way, to want to be loved is to infect the Other with one’s own facticity, to want to force her constantly to re-create you, as the condition of a freedom that submits and commits itself; it is to want freedom to be the foundation of fact and, at the same time, that fact should reign over freedom.  If this result could be achieved, the first consequence would be that I was safe within the other’s consciousness.  That is because, in the first place, the reason for my worry and my shame is that I apprehend and experience myself in my being-for-the-Other as something that can always be surpassed toward something else, purely as the object of a value judgment, purely a means, purely a tool.  My worry arises from the fact that I necessarily and freely accept this being that an Other, in absolute freedom, makes me be: “God knows what I am for her! God knows how she thinks of me.” That means: “God knows how she makes me be,” and I am haunted by this being, whom I am afraid of meeting one day at a bend in the road, who is such a stranger to me and who is nonetheless my being , and about whom I also know that, in spite of my efforts, I will never meet him.  But if the Other loves me, I become unsurpassable , which means that I must be the absolute end; in this sense I am saved from equipmentality ; my existence in the midst of the world becomes exactly correlative to my transcendence-for-myself, since my independence is absolutely protected.  The object that the Other has to make me be is an object-transcendence, an absolute center of reference around which all the implement-things in the world are arranged as pure means .  At the same time, as freedom’s absolute limit—i.e., as the limit of the absolute source of all values—I am protected against any eventual devaluation; I am the absolute value.  And, to the extent that I accept my being-for-the-Other, I accept myself qua value.  Thus, to want to be loved is to want to place oneself beyond the entire system of values posited by the Other, as the condition of all valuation and as the objective foundation of all values.  This demand is a standard theme in the conversations of lovers, whether—as in La Porte Étroite 3 —the person who wants to be loved identifies herself with an ascetic morality of self-overcoming and wants to embody the ideal limit of this overcoming, or whether, more commonly, the lover demands that his loved one should in her actions sacrifice traditional morality, and is concerned to know if the loved one would betray her friends for him, “would steal for him,” “would kill for him,” etc.  From this point of view, my being must escape the loved one’s look ; or, rather, it must be the object of a look with another structure; I must no longer be seen against the ground of the world as a this among other thises but I must be the starting point for the revelation of the world.  Indeed, to the extent that freedom, in its arising, is what makes a world exist, I must actually be—as the condition-limit of this arising—the condition of the arising of a world.  I must be the one whose function is to make the trees and the water exist, the towns and the fields and other men, in order then to give them to the Other who arranges them into a world—just as the mother, in matronymic societies, receives the deeds and the family name, not in order to keep them but in order immediately to pass them on to her children.  In one sense, if I am to be loved, I am the object through whose procurement the world will exist for the other; in another sense, I am the world.  Instead of being a “this,” carved out against the ground of the world, I am the object-ground against which the world stands out.  Thus I am reassured: the Other’s look no longer penetrates me with finitude; it no longer freezes me into merely being what I am ; I cannot be seen as ugly, or small, or cowardly, since these characteristics necessarily represent a factual limitation of my being and an apprehension of my finitude as finitude.  Of course, my possibles remain transcended possibilities, dead-possibilities; but all the possibles are mine; I am all the dead-possibilities in the world; I thereby cease to be a being who understands himself in terms of other beings, or his actions; rather, in the loving intuition that I demand, I must be given as an absolute totality, on whose basis all beings, and all its own actions, are to be understood.  One might say, adapting slightly a famous Stoic phrase, that “the loved one can turn three somersaults.” 4 Indeed, the ideal of the sage and the ideal of the person who wants to be loved coincide, in that both of them wish to be an object-totality accessible to a global intuition, which would apprehend actions in the world of the loved one and of the sage as partial structures, to be interpreted on the basis of the totality.  And just as the sage’s wisdom is presented as a state to be attained through an absolute metamorphosis, in the same way the Other’s freedom must undergo an absolute metamorphosis for me to achieve the condition of the loved one.  So far this description fits Hegel’s famous description of the relations between master and slave quite well.  What Hegel’s master is for the slave is what the lover wants to be for his loved one.  But the analogy ends here, because the master, in Hegel’s account, only demands the slave’s freedom laterally and, so to speak, implicitly, whereas the lover demands the beloved’s freedom first .  In this sense, if I am to be loved by the other, I must be freely chosen as loved.  We know that, in the common terminology of love, the loved one is referred to as the chosen .  But this choice must not be relative and contingent: the lover is irritated and feels himself devalued by the thought that the loved one chose him among others .  “So, if I had not come to this town, if I had not visited X’s house, you would not have known me, and you would not have loved me?” This thought distresses the lover: his love becomes one love among others, limited by the loved one’s facticity and by his own facticity, at the same time as by the contingency of their meetings: it becomes a love within the world , an object that presupposes the world and that can in turn exist for others.  To express what he demands, he uses clumsy words, sullied by “thinghood”; he says: “We were made for each other,” or even uses the phrase “kindred spirit.” But this requires interpretation: he knows full well that the idea of “being made for each other” refers to an original choice.  This choice might be God’s, as the being who is absolute choice: but here God only represents the demand for the absolute pushed to its limit.  In fact, what the lover demands is that the loved one should have made an absolute choice of him.  That means his loved one’s being-in-the-world must be a loving-being.  This loved one’s arising must be a free choice of her lover.  And, as the other is the foundation of my object-being, I demand of her that her freely arising being should have as its sole and absolute end her choice of me —i.e., that she should have chosen to be in order to found my objecthood and my facticity.  In this way my facticity is “saved.” It is no longer that unthinkable and insurmountable given from which I flee: it is that for which the other freely makes herself exist; it exists as the end that she sets herself.  I have infected her with my facticity, but, as it is insofar as she is a freedom that she has been infected by it, she returns it to me as a facticity that has been reclaimed and consented to; she is its foundation so that it can be her end.  On the basis of this love, then, I apprehend my alienation and my own facticity differently.  It is—insofar as it is for-the-Other—no longer a fact but a right.  My existence occurs because it is called for .  This existence, insofar as I accept it, becomes pure generosity.  I am because I bestow myself.  It is through my goodness that these beloved veins on my hands exist.  How good I am to have eyes, hair, eyebrows, and to lavish them tirelessly in a flood of generosity on that tireless desire that the other freely makes herself be.  Where, before we were loved, we were troubled by this unjustified and unjustifiable protuberance that was our existence, where we felt ourselves “ de trop ,” now we feel that this existence has been reclaimed and willed, right down to the last detail, by an absolute freedom that is conditioned by it at the same time—and that, along with our own freedom, we are willing ourselves.  That is the basis of love’s joy, when it exists: to feel ourselves justified in existing.  By the same token, if the loved one is able to love us, she is quite prepared to be assimilated by our freedom, because this being-loved that we wish for is already the ontological proof, applied to our being-for-the-Other.  Our objective essence implies the Other’s existence and, reciprocally, the other’s freedom founds our essence.  If we were able to internalize the whole system, we would be the foundation of ourselves.  Such is, therefore, the lover’s true aim, insofar as his love is an enterprise, i.e., a pro-ject for himself.  This project must give rise to a conflict.  The loved one, indeed, apprehends the lover as an object-other among others, which means she perceives him against the ground of the world, transcends him and utilizes him.  The loved one is the one who looks .  She cannot then make use of her transcendence to establish an ultimate limit to her surpassing, or make use of her freedom to captivate itself.  The loved one cannot wish to love.  The lover must therefore seduce the loved one, and his love cannot be distinguished from this enterprise of seduction.  In seducing the Other, my aim is not at all to reveal my subjectivity to her: in any case, I would not be able to do this except by looking at the Other; but through that look I would cause the Other’s subjectivity to disappear—which is what I want to assimilate.  To seduce is to accept—entirely, and as a risk to be run—my objecthood for the Other, to place myself before her look and make myself looked at by her, and to incur the danger of being-seen in order to make a new start and to appropriate the other in and through my objecthood.  I refuse to leave the territory where my objecthood is experienced; this is the ground on which I want to take up the struggle, by making myself into a fascinating object .  In Part Two we defined fascination as a state: we said that it is a non-thetic consciousness of being nothing in the presence of being.  Seduction aims to bring about in the Other the consciousness of her nothingness as she faces the seductive object.  Through seduction I aim to constitute myself as a fullness of being and to make myself recognized as such .  To that end, I constitute myself as a signifying object.  My actions must indicate in two directions.  On the one hand, they point toward a depth of objective, hidden being, which we refer to incorrectly as “subjectivity”; the action is not merely done for its own sake but indicates an infinite and undifferentiated series of other real and possible actions that I offer as constituting my objective and unperceived being.  In this way I try to guide the transcendence that is transcending me, to refer it toward the infinity of my dead-possibilities, precisely in order to be unsurpassable—and to the extent to which the only thing that cannot be surpassed is, precisely, the infinite.  On the other hand, each one of my actions attempts to indicate the world in the greatest possible breadth, and to present me as being linked to the world’s vastest regions—whether I present the world to my loved one and try to constitute myself as the necessary intermediary between her and the world, or whether I simply demonstrate, through my actions, my endlessly varied powers over the world (money, power, connections, etc.).  In the first case, I try to constitute myself as infinite in depth; in the second case, I try to identify myself with the world.  Through these various methods I propose myself as unsurpassable.  This proposition is not sufficient on its own: it is only an investment in the Other, and it cannot acquire the value of a fact without the consent of the Other’s freedom, which has to captivate itself as it recognizes itself as nothingness, in the face of my absolute plenitude of being.  It might be said that these different attempts at expression presuppose language.  We will not disagree, and we will even say: they are language or, alternatively, a fundamental mode of language.  For, if there are psychological and historical problems concerning the existence, learning, and use of some particular language, there is no particular problem in relation to the so-called invention of language.  Language is not a phenomenon that is added on to our being-for-the-Other: it is being-for-the-Other from the outset, i.e., the fact that a subjectivity experiences itself as an object for the other.  In a universe of pure objects, there would be no circumstance in which language could be “invented,” since it presupposes at its origin a relation to another subject; and within the intersubjectivity of our for-Others it is not necessary to invent it, because it is already given in our recognition of the other.  By virtue solely of the fact that, no matter what I do, my freely conceived and executed actions, and my pro-jects toward my possibilities, have an external meaning that eludes me and that I undergo, I am language.  It is in this sense—and only in this sense—that Heidegger is right in asserting that: I am what I say .  5 This language is not, indeed, an instinct belonging to the constituted human creature, nor is it an invention of our subjectivity—but nor must it be reduced purely to Dasein ’s “being-outside-itself.” It is part of the human condition ; it is from the outset the experience that a for-itself can have of his being-for-the-Other and, thereafter, the surpassing of this experience, and the making use of it toward possibilities that are my possibilities—i.e., my possibilities of being this or that for the Other.  It is not therefore distinct from our recognition of the Other’s existence.  The other’s arising as a look that confronts me makes language arise with it, as the condition of my being.  This primitive language is not necessarily seduction, and we will see other forms of it; moreover, we have observed that no attitude is basic in relation to the Other and that they succeed each other in a circle, each one implying the other.  But, conversely, seduction does not presuppose any earlier form of language: it is in its entirety a realization of language, which means that seduction can reveal language entirely, and in one stroke, as the basic mode of expression.  It goes without saying that by “language” we mean all expressive phenomena and not the spoken word, which is a derivative and secondary mode, whose appearance may become an object of historical study.  In particular, in the case of seduction, the aim of language is not to put forward something to be known but to make something experienced.  But in this first attempt to find a fascinating language, I am groping blindly, as all I have to guide me is the abstract and empty form of my objecthood for the other.  I cannot even conceive of the effect that my movements or my attitude will have, since they are always reclaimed and founded by a freedom that will surpass them, and since they can have meaning only if this freedom confers it on them.  In this way the “meaning” of my expressions always escapes me: I never know exactly if I am signifying what I want to signify or even if I am signifying; I would need to be able to read inside the other, which is, as a matter of principle, inconceivable.  And, lacking any knowledge of what in fact I am expressing for the Other, I constitute my language as an incomplete phenomenon of flight outside me.  From the moment I express myself, I can only guess at the meaning of what I express (which is to say, in short, the meaning of what I am), since—from this perspective—to express and to be are one and the same.  The Other is always there, present and experienced as that which gives language its meaning.  Each expression, each gesture, each word is—on my side—a particular trial of the Other’s alienating reality.  The psychiatric patient is not alone in being able to say—as, for example, in psychotic delusions of control—“Someone is stealing my thoughts.” 6 Rather, the very fact of expression is a theft of one’s thought, since the thought needs the help of an alienating freedom in order to constitute itself as an object.  That is why this first dimension of language—insofar as I make use of it for the other—is sacred .  A sacred object is, in effect, an object in the world that points to a transcendence beyond the world.  Language reveals to me the freedom of the person silently listening to me, i.e., his transcendence.  But in that same moment I remain, for the other, a signifying object—as I always have been.  There is no route which, beginning from my objecthood, can indicate my transcendence to the other.  Attitudes, expressions, and words can only ever point, for him, to other attitudes, other expressions, and other words.  In this way language remains for the Other just a property of a magical object, and a magical object itself: it is an action at a distance whose effect the Other knows exactly.  Thus the word is sacred when I am the one using it, and magical when heard by the other.  So I do not know my language any better than I know my body for the other.  I cannot hear myself speaking or see myself smiling.  The problem of language is exactly parallel to the problem of bodies, and the descriptions that were applicable in one case also apply in the other.  However, even if the activity of fascination were to bring about in the Other a being-fascinated, it would not succeed on its own in bringing about love.  We can be fascinated by an orator, an actor, a tightrope walker: that does not mean that we love him.  Admittedly, we cannot take our eyes off him; but he still stands out against the ground of the world, and the attitude of fascination does not present the fascinating object as the ultimate limit of transcendence: quite on the contrary, it is an attitude of transcendence.  When therefore does the loved one become a lover in her turn? The answer is simple: when she forms the project to be loved.  In itself, an Other-object is never sufficiently strong to occasion love.  If the ideal of love is the appropriation of the Other as the Other—i.e., as a looking subjectivity—this ideal can be projected only on the basis of my encounter with the Other-subject, not with the Other-object.  Seduction can only adorn the Other-object who tries to seduce me with the character of a precious object, “to be possessed”; it may lead me to take great risks to conquer her; but we should not confuse this desire to appropriate an object in the midst of the world with love.  Love can only arise within the loved one out of the experience she undergoes of her alienation, and of the flight of her being away toward an other.  But, once again, if this is the case, the loved one will only transform herself into a lover if she plans to be loved—in other words if what she seeks to conquer is not a body but the other’s subjectivity as such.  Indeed, the only means that she can conceive of by which to actualize this appropriation is to make herself loved.  Thus we can see that to love is, in essence, the project to make oneself loved.  In consequence, this new contradiction and this new conflict arise: each of the lovers is entirely captive to the other, insofar as each wants to be loved by the other to the exclusion of anyone else; but at the same time each of them demands from the other a love that cannot be reduced to the “project-to-be-loved.” What the lover demands, in fact, is that the other, without seeking from the outset to be loved, should have an intuition that is simultaneously contemplative and affective of her loved one as the objective limit to her freedom, as the inescapable and chosen foundation of her transcendence, as the totality of being and the supreme value.  The love that is hereby demanded from the other cannot ask for anything: it is a pure commitment, without reciprocity.  But such a love, precisely, could exist only as a demand on the part of the lover, and the lover is made captive in a wholly different way: in his demand itself, he is held captive; to the extent that love is indeed a demand to be loved, he is a freedom that wants to be a body, and demands an “outside”; he is a freedom, therefore, that acts out its flight away toward the other, a freedom that, as a freedom, lays claim to its alienation.  The lover’s freedom, in its very effort to make itself loved as an object by the other, alienates itself as it flows into his body-for-the-other; in other words, it produces in its existence a dimension of flight away toward the other; this freedom is a constant refusal to posit itself as pure ipseity, because this affirmation of itself as itself would lead to the collapse of the Other as look, and to the arising of the object-other—and therefore to a state of affairs where the very possibility of being loved disappears, since the other is reduced to her dimension of objectivity.  This refusal therefore constitutes freedom as dependent on the other, and the other as a subjectivity becomes the insurmountable limit of the for-itself’s freedom: its goal and its supreme end, insofar as she holds the key to the for-itself’s being.  Again, we encounter here the ideal of love’s enterprise: alienated freedom.  But it is the person who wants to be loved who, insofar as he wants to be loved, alienates his freedom.  My freedom alienates itself in the presence of the pure subjectivity of the other who founds my objectivity; it could not become alienated before an other-object.  In that form, indeed, the loved one’s alienation—which the lover dreams of—would be contradictory, since, necessarily, the loved one could found the lover’s being only by transcending it toward other worldly objects: this movement of transcendence therefore cannot constitute the object it surpasses as a transcended object and, at the same time, as the object-limit of any transcendence.  Thus each person, in the loving couple, wants to be the object for whom the other’s freedom alienates itself in an original intuition; but this intuition—which would be love in the true sense of the word—is only a contradictory ideal of the for-itself: in consequence, each lover is alienated only to the precise degree to which he or she demands the Other’s alienation.  Each one wants to be loved by the other, without taking into account that to love is to want to be loved—and thus that, in wanting to be loved by the other, each one only wants the other to want to be loved by them.  In this way, the relations in love form an unending system of referrals, analogous to the pure reflection-reflected structure of consciousness, with the value “love” as the presiding ideal, i.e., a fusion of consciousnesses in which each one would preserve its alterity in order to found the other.  That is because each consciousness is separated from the other by a nothingness that is insurmountable, since it is—at the same time—an internal negation by one of the other, and a de facto nothingness between the two internal negations.  Love is a contradictory attempt to overcome the de facto negation while at the same time maintaining the internal negation.  I demand the other to love me and I do all that I can to fulfill my project, but if the other loves me, she radically disappoints me even in her love: I required her to found my being as a favored object by maintaining herself in her pure subjectivity before me; and, the moment she loves me, she experiences me as a subject and is ruined by her objectivity in relation to my subjectivity.  The problem of my being-for-the-Other remains therefore without a solution, and each lover remains, for himself or for herself, as a total subjectivity; nothing occurs to relieve either of the duty that each of them has to make himself or herself exist for itself; nothing removes their contingency or saves them from facticity.  At least each of them has gained by no longer being in danger from the other’s freedom—but not at all in the way they believe: it is not because the Other makes the lover’s being into an object-limit of her transcendence but because the other experiences him as a subjectivity and wishes to experience him only as such.  Even so, the gain is constantly compromised: in the first place, each consciousness is able to free itself suddenly from its chains and to contemplate the Other as an object .  Then the bewitchment comes to an end, and the other becomes a means among other means; he is still an object for the Other, as he desires to be, but an object-tool, an object that is constantly transcended; the illusion, the play of mirrors that forms love’s concrete reality, suddenly ends.  And then, in love, each consciousness seeks to house its being-for-the-Other in a sheltered place within the other’s freedom.  The assumption here is that the other is beyond the world as a pure subjectivity, as the absolute through which the world comes to being.  But it suffices for the lovers to be looked at together by some third party for each of them to experience the objectification, not just of his or her self but of the other.  At the same time the other becomes for me no longer the absolute transcendence who founds me in my being but a transcendence that is transcended—not by me but by someone else—and my original relationship to her—i.e., my relation to my lover of being loved—becomes frozen into a dead-possibility.  It is no longer the experienced relation between an object that sets a limit to any transcendence and the freedom that founds it; rather it is an object-love, alienating itself in its entirety toward the third person.  That is the real reason why lovers seek solitude.  It is because the appearance of a third person—whoever he is—means the destruction of their love.  But a de facto solitude (we are alone in my bedroom) is not at all a de jure solitude.  In fact, even if nobody sees us, we exist for every consciousness and we are conscious of existing for all of them: it follows that love, as a fundamental mode of being-for-the-Other, contains in its being-for-the-Other the seeds of its own destruction.  We have just defined the threefold destructibility of love: in the first place it is, in essence, an illusion and an infinite referral, because to love is to want to be loved, and therefore to want the other to want me to love her.  And a preontological understanding of this trickery is given within love’s very impulse: hence the lover’s constant dissatisfaction.  This is not caused, as it is too frequently said, by the loved one’s unworthiness but by an implicit understanding of the fact that the intuition that belongs to love is, as a foundation-intuition, unattainable.  The more someone loves me, the more I lose my being , and the more I am returned to my own responsibilities and my own possible way of being.  In the second place, it is always possible that the other will wake up: she can at any moment summon me before her as an object: hence the lover’s constant insecurity.  In the third place, love is an absolute that is constantly being relativized by others.  One would have to be alone in the world with one’s loved one for love to retain its character as an absolute axis of reference: hence the lover’s constant shame (or pride—which in this case comes to the same thing).  Thus I will have tried in vain to lose myself in objectivity: my passion will have been of no use; the other has returned me—either by herself or through others—to my unjustifiable subjectivity.  This observation may provoke total despair and a new attempt to bring about the assimilation of the Other and myself.  Its ideal will be the opposite of the one we have just described: instead of planning to absorb the other while retaining her alterity, I will plan to make the other absorb me, and to lose myself in her subjectivity in order to rid myself of my own.  This enterprise is translated in concrete terms into the attitude of masochism : since the Other is the foundation of my being-for-the-Other, if I could be relieved by the Other of the trouble of making myself exist, I would no longer be anything other than a being-in-itself, founded in its being by a freedom.  In this case it is my own subjectivity that I regard as the obstacle to the primordial act through which the Other might found me in my being; it is that, above all, that I need to negate with my own freedom .  I try therefore to commit myself entirely within my object-being, to refuse to be anything more than an object, to lie restfully within the other; and, as I experience this object-being in shame, I want and I love my shame as a profound sign of my objectivity; and, as the Other apprehends me as an object through sexual desire , 7 I want to be desired, and I make myself in shame an object of desire.  This attitude would be quite similar to that of love if, rather than seeking to exist for the other as the object that sets a limit to her transcendence, I tried desperately, on the contrary, to make myself be treated as an object among others, as an instrument to be used: here it is a matter of negating my transcendence, and not hers.  My project this time will not be that of capturing her freedom but, on the contrary, I wish this freedom to be, and to want itself, radically free.  In this way, the more I feel myself surpassed toward other ends, the more I will exult in the abdication of my transcendence.  Ultimately, I plan to be nothing more than an object , that is, radically an in-itself .  But insofar as this in-itself will be founded by a freedom that has absorbed my own, my being will become once again its own foundation.  Masochism, like sadism, involves an assumption of guilt.  8 I am guilty, in effect, simply by virtue of being an object.  I am guilty in relation to myself, since I consent to my absolute alienation, and guilty in relation to the Other, because I provide her with the opportunity to be guilty, i.e., to radically fail my freedom as such.  Masochism is an attempt not to fascinate the other through my objectivity but to become fascinated myself by my objectivity-for-the-Other, i.e., to make the Other constitute me as an object in such a way that I grasp my subjectivity non-thetically as a nothing , in the presence of the in-itself that I represent in the eyes of the Other.  It is characterized by a sort of vertigo: vertigo, not in the face of a precipice made out of rock or earth but in the face of the abyss of the Other’s subjectivity.  But masochism in itself is and must be a failure: in order to become fascinated by my me-object, in fact, I would have to be able to actualize an intuitive apprehension of this object as it is for the other —which is necessarily impossible.  Thus my alienated me, far from allowing me to begin to be fascinated by it, remains necessarily elusive.  Well might the masochist crawl on his knees, display himself in ridiculous postures, offer himself to be used as a mere inanimate instrument: it is for the other that he will be obscene or merely passive, for the other that he will submit to these postures; as far as he is concerned, he is condemned forever to set them for himself .  It is in and through his transcendence that he positions himself as a being to be transcended; and the more he tries to taste his objectivity, the more he becomes submerged, to the point of anguish, by the consciousness of his.  In particular the masochist who pays a woman to whip him is treating her as an instrument and thereby places himself in a relation of transcendence to her.  Thus the masochist ends up by treating the other as an object and transcending her toward her own objectivity.  Recall, for example, the tribulations of Sacher-Masoch, who, in order to make himself scorned, insulted, reduced to a humiliating position, was constrained to make use of the great love that women felt for him, i.e., to act upon them insofar as they experienced themselves as an object for him.  Thus, one way or another, the masochist’s objectivity escapes him; and it can even happen—it happens most often—that in seeking to grasp his objectivity he finds the objectivity of the other, thereby liberating his subjectivity, in spite of himself.  Masochism is necessarily, therefore, a failure.  Nothing in that should surprise us, if we consider that masochism is a “vice” and that vice is, essentially, a love of failure.  But this is not the place to describe the distinctive structures of vice.  It is enough to point out that masochism is a subject’s constant effort to annihilate his subjectivity by getting the other to reassimilate it, and that this endeavor is accompanied by the exhausting and delicious consciousness of failure, to the point where failure itself becomes the subject’s main aim.  9 II.  THE SECOND ATTITUDE TOWARD THE OTHER: INDIFFERENCE, DESIRE, HATRED, SADISM The failure of the first attitude toward the other may provide my opportunity to take up the second.  But, in actual fact, neither of these two really comes first: each of them is a fundamental reaction to the original situation of being-for-the-Other.  I may be led, therefore, by just that impossibility of my assimilating the other’s consciousness via my objecthood for her, to turn deliberately toward the other and to look at her.  In this case, to look at the Other’s look is to posit myself in my own freedom and to attempt, from the depths of that freedom, to confront the other’s freedom.  In this way, the meaning of the conflict I am seeking is to bring to light the struggle of two freedoms confronting each other as freedoms.  But this intention is bound to be immediately disappointed because, by the mere fact of affirming myself in my freedom as I confront the Other, I make the other into a transcended-transcendence, i.e., an object.  The history of this failure is what we are going to try to retrace now.  We know its basic outline: toward the Other who looks at me, I direct in turn my look.  But a looking cannot be looked at: as soon as I look toward it, it vanishes, and I can no longer see anything but the eyes.  At this moment, the Other becomes a being whom I possess and who recognizes my freedom.  It seems that I have achieved my aim, since I possess the being who has the key to my objecthood and I am able to make her experience my freedom in a thousand ways.  But in reality everything has collapsed, because the being that remains between my hands is an object-Other.  As such, she has lost the key to my object-being, and all she possesses of me is a pure and simple image, which is nothing more than one of the ways she is objectively affected, and which can no longer touch me; and if she experiences the effects of my freedom, if I can act on her being in a thousand ways and transcend her possibilities with all of my possibilities, that is insofar as she is an object in the world and, as such, not in any position to recognize my freedom.  My disappointment is entire, since I am trying to appropriate the Other’s freedom and I suddenly perceive that I can act on the other only insofar as this freedom has collapsed beneath my gaze.  This disappointment will give rise to my subsequent attempts to seek the Other’s freedom through the object that she is for me, and to find the special strategies through which I might appropriate this freedom, through a total appropriation of the Other’s body.  We can anticipate that these attempts are necessarily doomed to failure.  But it may also happen that my first reaction to my being-for-the-Other is to “return her gaze.” 10 In other words, I can choose myself, as I arise in the world, as looking back at the looking other, and build my own subjectivity upon the collapse of the other’s subjectivity.  Let us call this attitude indifference toward the Other .  We are dealing in this case with blindness in relation to others.  But the term “blindness” should not lead us astray: I do not submit to this blindness as a state; I am my own blindness in relation to others, and this blindness includes an implicit understanding of my being-for-the-Other, i.e., of the Other’s transcendence in her looking.  Only this understanding is what I myself decide to conceal.  I practice therefore a sort of de facto solipsism; other people are figures that pass in the street, those magical objects that are liable to act across a distance, and on which I can act by behaving in particular ways.  I scarcely pay attention to them, and I act as if I were alone in the world: I skirt “those people” as I skirt the walls; I avoid them just as I avoid obstacles, so that their object-freedom means no more to me than their “coefficient of adversity”; I do not even imagine that they might look at me.  Of course, they have some knowledge of me, but this knowledge does not touch me: it consists merely in modifications in their being that are not passed on from them to me, and that are tainted by what we might call a “suffered subjectivity” or an “object-subjectivity:” in other words, these modifications are the effect of my action on these people; they do not communicate what they are but what I am.  These “people” are functions; the ticket inspector is no more than the function of punching tickets; the café waiter is no more than the function of serving customers.  On that basis I can make use of them to maximize my interests, if I know their keys , and the “watchwords” that can activate their mechanisms: hence the “ moraliste ” psychology we received from seventeenth-century France; hence the treatises of the eighteenth century, Béroalde de Verville’s Le Moyen de Parvenir , Laclos’s Les Liaisons Dangereuses , Hérault de Séchelles’s Traité de l’Ambition , which provide us with a practical knowledge of the other and the art of acting upon him.  11 In this state of blindness, I am unaware of the other’s absolute subjectivity, as the foundation of my being-in-itself and, concurrently, of my being-for-the-other—and especially my “body for the other.” In one sense, I am reassured: I “have a nerve” or, in other words, I am not remotely conscious of the fact that the other’s look might freeze my possibilities and my body; the state that I am in is the opposite of the state we know as “timidity.” I am at ease, and not an embarrassment to myself, because I am not outside , and I do not feel myself to be alienated.  This state of blindness can continue for a long time, if it suits my fundamental bad faith; it can extend, with interruptions, over several years, over a whole lifetime: some men die without—apart from some brief and terrifying moments of illumination—ever suspecting what the other is.  But even someone completely immersed in this state would not cease to feel its insufficiency.  And, as with all bad faith, that insufficiency provides a motivation to come out of it, because my blindness in relation to the other obliterates at the same time any lived apprehension of my objectivity .  However, the other as freedom and my objectivity as an alienated-me are there , unnoticed—not in any thematic form but given in my very understanding of the world and of my being in the world.  The ticket inspector, even if he is seen as a mere function, directs me in his very function toward my being-outside, even though this being-outside is neither grasped nor able to be grasped.  This explains my constant feeling of unease, of something missing.  The fact is that my fundamental project in relation to the Other—whichever attitude I take up—is twofold: on the one hand I protect myself against the danger to which I am exposed by my being-outside-in-the-Other’s-freedom, and on the other hand I make use of the Other in order at last to totalize the detotalized totality that I am, to close the incomplete circle, and finally to make of myself my own foundation.  Now, on the one hand I am thrown back, by the disappearance of the Other as a look, upon my unjustifiable subjectivity, and my being is reduced to that constant pursued-pursuit of an elusive being in-itself-for-itself; without the other I am able to grasp, laid bare, the terrible necessity allotted to me of being free, i.e., the fact that I cannot hand over to anyone else the task of making myself be, even though I did not choose to be or to be born .  But, on the other hand, although my blindness in relation to the other seems to relieve me of the fear of being in danger from the other’s freedom, it nonetheless incorporates an implicit understanding of that freedom.  Therefore, in that very moment in which I can believe myself to be an absolute and unique subjectivity, it positions me at the highest level of objectivity, since I am seen without even being able to experience my being seen or able, through this ordeal, to protect myself against my “being-seen.” I am possessed without being able to confront my possessor.  In the direct experience of the Other who looks, I can defend myself as I experience the other, and it remains possible for me to transform the other into an object.  But if the other is an object for me while she looks at me , then I am in danger without knowing it.  In this way my blindness is disquieting because it is accompanied by my consciousness of an elusive “roving eye” that threatens to alienate me without my knowing it.  This uneasiness will induce a new attempt on my part to seize the Other’s freedom.  But that will mean that I turn back on the Other-object that shadows me, and try to use it as an instrument to reach its freedom.  Only, just because I approach the “Other” as an object , I cannot require her to account for her transcendence, and furthermore, as I myself am adopting the perspective of the Other’s objectification, I cannot even conceive of what it is that I wish to appropriate.  Thus my attitude toward this object I am considering is irritating and contradictory: not only can I not get what I want from it but, in addition, this quest makes the very knowledge of what I want evaporate.  I undertake a desperate search for the other’s freedom and, along my way, I find myself committed in a search whose meaning has been lost; all my efforts to restore to the search its meaning only deprive me of more of it and arouse my shock and unease—just as when I try to recover the memory of a dream and the memory melts between my fingers, leaving me with a vague and irritating impression of a state of absolute knowledge without any object, or just as when I try to spell out the content of an incorrect recollection, and this explication itself makes it collapse into translucency.  My original attempt to take hold of the other’s free subjectivity through her objectivity-for-me is sexual desire .  It might seem surprising to see, cited in the context of the primary attitudes that merely demonstrate our basic way of accomplishing our being-for-the-Other, a phenomenon that is usually classified as a “psycho-physiological reaction.” In fact, for most psychologists, desire, as a conscious datum, is closely correlated with the nature of our sexual organs, and it is only in conjunction with a thorough study of these that we will be able to understand it.  But as the details of the differentiated bodily structures (mammalian, viviparous, etc.) and, thereafter, the specific structure of the sex (uterus, tubes, ovaries, etc.) are absolutely contingent, and have no place whatsoever in an ontology of “consciousness” or “ Dasein ,” the same seems to apply to sexual desire.  Just as our sexual organs are a contingent and particular datum about our body, so the desire that corresponds to them should be seen as a contingent modality of our psychological life, which means that the only way to describe it will be within an empirical psychology founded on biology.  This shows up in the name—“ sexual instinct ”—that we use to refer to desire and all the psychological structures to do with it.  This term—“instinct”—is in fact always used to describe contingent formations of psychological life that have the twofold character of being coextensive with the entire duration of that life (or which, in any case, are not owed to our “history”) and of not being able to be deduced from the psyche’s essence itself.  That is why the existentialist philosophies have not felt obliged to concern themselves with sexuality.  Heidegger, especially, doesn’t make the slightest reference to it in his existential analytic, with the result that his “ Dasein ” strikes us as sexless.  And of course it is possible to take the view that the specification of “human reality” as “masculine” or “feminine” is a contingent matter; of course we can say that the problem of sexual differentiation has nothing to do with that of Existence ( Existenz ), since a man “exists” no more and no less than a woman.  These points are not absolutely convincing.  We can agree, if need be, that sexual difference belongs in the domain of facticity.  But must that imply that the “for-itself” is sexual “by accident,” simply through the contingency of its having that kind of body? Can we suppose that the vast business of sexual life is surplus to the human condition? Yet at first sight it seems that desire and its opposite—sexual horror—are fundamental structures of our being-for-the-Other.  Obviously, if sexuality originates in being sexed as a physiological and contingent determination of man, it will not be crucial to the being of our for-the-Other.  But are we not entitled to ask whether this problem might be of the same kind as the one we encountered in connection with sensation and the sensory organs? We are told that man is a sexual being because he possesses a sexual organ.  And what if the opposite were true? What if the sexual organ were merely the instrument, and more like an image , of a fundamental sexuality? And what if man only possesses a sexual organ because he is originally and fundamentally a sexual being, as a being who exists in the world in relationship to other men? Infantile sexuality precedes the physiological maturation of the sexual organs; eunuchs do not, as such, cease to feel desire.  Nor do many old people.  The state of being able to make use of a sexual organ, apt to fertilize and to provide pleasure, only represents one phase and aspect of our sexual life.  There is a mode of sexuality that is capable of “satisfaction,” and the fully formed sexual organ represents and concretizes this possibility.  But there are other modes of sexuality that are not satisfied in this way and, if we take these modalities into account, we must acknowledge that sexuality, which appears at birth, only disappears at the moment of death.  Moreover, neither penile turgescence nor any other physiological phenomenon (or the mere fact of being conscious of these physiological modifications) will ever be able to explain or to provoke sexual desire—no more than vasoconstriction or pupillary dilation can explain or provoke fear.  In both these cases, although the body plays an important role, we will have to consult our being-in-the-world and our being-for-the-Other to gain a sound understanding: what I desire is a human being, not an insect or a mollusk, and I desire her on the basis of her and of my being in situation in the world, and of her being an other for me and my being an other for her.  The fundamental problem of sexuality can therefore be put like this: is sexuality a contingent accident bound up with our physiological nature, or is it a necessary structure of being-for-itself-for-the-Other? It follows, simply from the fact that the question can be raised in these terms, that it is for ontology to decide.  That will be possible only if, precisely, it takes on the task of determining and establishing the meaning of our sexual existence for the other.  To be sexed, in effect, means—at the conclusion of our description of the body, undertaken in the last chapter—to exist sexually for an Other who exists sexually for me—with the understanding, of course, that this Other is not necessarily or in the first instance for me —and neither am I for her—a heterosexual existent, but only a sexed being in general.  Considered from the point of view of the for-itself, this apprehension of the Other’s sexuality cannot be seen as a pure disinterested contemplation of his primary or secondary sexual characteristics.  The Other is not in the first place sexed for me because I conclude—from the distribution of his hair, the roughness of his hands, the sound of his voice, his strength—that he is of the masculine sex.  Those are derivative conclusions that point toward a primary state.  The first apprehension of the Other’s sexuality, as it is lived and undergone, can only be desire : it is in desiring the other (or in discovering that I am incapable of desiring her), or in apprehending her desire for me, that I encounter her sexed-being; and desire reveals my sexed-being and her sexed-being at the same time , my body as sex and her body.  In order to decide the nature and the ontological place of sex, therefore, a study of desire is required.  What, then, is desire? And, in the first place, what do we desire? We should abandon immediately the idea that desire is always a desire for sensual pleasure or a desire to bring some painful state to an end.  If we start from this condition of immanence, we cannot explain how a subject might proceed from it to “attach” his desire to an object.  No subjectivist, immanence-based theory will be able to explain the fact that it is not merely a state of satisfaction that we desire but a woman.  So we should define desire in terms of its transcendent object.  Still, it would be quite wrong to say that what is desired, in desiring, is our “physical possession” of the desired object, if what we mean by “possessing” the object is making love with it.  Of course the sexual act relieves us for a moment from our desire, and it is possible in some cases that it is explicitly stipulated as the outcome that desire wishes to achieve—when, for example, the desire is painful and tiring.  But in these cases the desire itself must be conceived of as the object to be “eliminated,” and that can happen only by means of a reflective act of consciousness.  But, by itself, desire is unreflective; as such, it cannot posit itself to itself as an object to be eliminated.  Only a rake represents his desire to himself, treats it as an object, stimulates it, dims it down, postpones its satisfaction, etc.  But then, we should take note, what has become desirable is the desire.  The mistake here arises from our having learned that the sexual act removes desire.  In consequence we combine an item of knowledge with the desire itself and, for reasons quite external to the essence of the desire (procreation, the sanctity of motherhood, the exceptional strength of the pleasure caused by ejaculation, the symbolic value of the sexual act), we attach sensual pleasure to it from outside as its normal mode of satisfaction.  Thus the average man is unable, by virtue of his conformism and his lazy thinking, to conceive of any end to his desire other than ejaculation.  This has enabled us to conceive of desire as an instinct, whose origin and goal are strictly physiological, since—in the case of the man, for example—its cause is erection and its endpoint is ejaculation.  But desire on its own does not remotely entail the sexual act; it does not present it as a theme; it does not even make a start on it, as we can see in the case of the desire manifested by very young children, or by adults who do not know the “technical” side of love.  Similarly, desire does not desire any particular amorous practice; the diversity of such practices, which vary according to social group, is sufficient proof of this.  In general terms, desire is not a desire to do something.  “Doing” enters the scene, from elsewhere, later: it combines with desire and requires an apprenticeship; there is a technique to love, with its own ends and means.  As desire, therefore, does not posit as its supreme goal its own elimination, or select a particular action as its ultimate end, it is straightforwardly a desire for some transcendent object.  We return here to that affective intentionality, discussed in earlier chapters, that Scheler and Husserl have described.  But what is the object of desire? Should we say that what is desired, in desire, is a body ? In one sense this cannot be denied.  But we need to be clear.  Of course it is the body that troubles us: a glimpsed arm, or a breast, or perhaps a foot.  But we have to see that in the first instance we desire an arm, or a breast, only insofar as they are encountered against the ground of the entire body, which is present as an organic totality.  As a totality, the body itself may be concealed; it may be that all I see is a naked arm.  But it is there, as the basis on which I apprehend the arm as an arm; it is just as present, and just as connected to the arm I can see, as the arabesques in the carpet that are hidden by the legs of the table are present and connected to the arabesques I can see.  And my desire does not get this wrong: it is not directed to a collection of physiological elements but to a complete figure or, better still, to a figure in situation .  Someone’s posture, as we will note later, plays an important role in provoking desire.  But, along with someone’s posture, the immediate surroundings are given and—eventually—the world.  But this shows us how far we have traveled from a mere physiological itch: desire posits the world, and the body is desired on the basis of the world, and the beautiful arm on the basis of the body.  The procedure here is exactly the same as the one we described in the last chapter, by means of which we apprehend the Other’s body on the basis of her situation in the world.  And this should not surprise us in the least, since desire is nothing but one of the major ways in which the Other’s body can be revealed.  But by the same token we do not desire a body as a purely material object: a purely material object is precisely not in situation .  In this way, the organic totality that is immediately present in desire is desirable only insofar as it reveals not only a life but, in addition, an adapted consciousness.  Nonetheless, as we will see, this being-in-situation of the Other disclosed by desire is of an entirely new type.  Moreover, the consciousness that we have in view is still only a property of the desired object, which means it is no more than the direction in which the objects in the world are flowing away, insofar as this flowing away remains contained and localized within my world, of which it forms a part.  Of course it is possible to desire a woman sleeping, but only to the extent that her sleeping appears against the ground of her consciousness.  Consciousness always remains, therefore, at the horizon of the desired body: it provides its meaning and its unity.  A living body as an organic totality in situation, with consciousness at its horizon: such is the object to which desire is addressed .  And what does desire want from this object? We cannot establish this until we have answered a preliminary question: Who is the one who desires? Without doubt, I am the one who desires, and desire is a distinctive mode of my subjectivity.  Since its only way of being is as a non-positional consciousness of itself, desire is a mode of consciousness.  Nonetheless, we should not think that the only difference between a desiring consciousness and, for example, a cognitive consciousness lies in the nature of its object.  When the for-itself chooses itself as desire, it does not indifferently produce a state of desire while remaining itself unaltered—in the way that a cause, in Stoic philosophy, produces its effect.  It transports itself to a specific level of existence, which is not the same, for example, as that of a for-itself choosing itself as a metaphysical being.  In all cases, as we have seen, consciousness maintains some relationship with its own facticity.  But this relationship can vary from one mode of consciousness to another.  The facticity of a painful consciousness, for example, is a facticity revealed in the course of a constant flight from it.  The facticity of desire is not the same.  A man who desires exists his body in a particular way and, in so doing, places himself at a particular level of existence.  Indeed, everyone can agree that to desire is not simply to want something; it is not a clear and translucent wanting which aims, through our body, at some specific object.  Desire defines itself as a kind of trouble .  And this expression—“trouble”—can help us to specify its nature: we oppose troubled water to transparent water, a troubled look to a clear gaze.  12 In its essential characteristics, troubled water remains water; it retains the fluidity of water, but its translucency is “troubled” by an elusive presence within it—everywhere and nowhere—that makes the water appear by itself to become thickened.  This can of course be explained in terms of the presence of solid fine particles, suspended within the liquid, but that is the explanation of an expert .  We first grasp troubled water as altered by the presence of an invisible something that fails to make itself distinct and takes the form of pure de facto resistance.  If we say that a desiring consciousness is troubled , it is by analogy with troubled water.  To clarify the analogy, we may compare sexual desire with another form of desire, for example with hunger.  Hunger, like sexual desire, presupposes a particular bodily state, defined in this case by impoverished blood, increased salivary secretion, contractions of the digestive tract, etc.  These various phenomena are described and classified from the Other’s perspective.  For the for-itself, they take the form of pure facticity.  But this facticity does not compromise the very nature of the for-itself, because the for-itself immediately flees from it, toward its possibles, i.e., toward a specific state of satisfied-hunger which, as we noted in Part Two, is hunger’s in-itself-for-itself.  In this way hunger is a pure surpassing of bodily facticity and, to the extent that the for-itself is non-thetically conscious of this facticity, it is immediately conscious of it as a state of facticity it has surpassed.  The body is in this case fully past , and has been sur-passed .  13 Of course, sexual desire exhibits the structure common to all appetites: a bodily state.  Another person may notice various physiological modifications (the erection of the penis, swelling of the nipples, modifications in the circulatory system, rise in body temperature, etc.).  And this facticity is existed by the desiring consciousness; it is on its basis —or, as we might put it, through it—that the desired body appears as desirable.  Nonetheless, if we limit our description to this, sexual desire will appear to be crisp and clear , as if it were comparable to the desire to eat and drink.  It will be a pure flight from facticity toward other possibles.  Now, everyone knows that a huge gulf separates sexual desire from our other appetites.  We all know the infamous expression “Making love with a pretty woman when you feel like it is like drinking a glass of iced water when you’re thirsty,” and we also know that it strikes us as an unsatisfactory, and even scandalous, comparison.  The fact is that, when I desire a woman, I am not situated outside that desire: desire compromises me; I am complicit with my desire.  Or, rather, desire can be summed up in its entirety as a lapse into complicity with the body.  We need only consult our own experience: we know that in sexual desire consciousness seems to become “thicker,” that we feel as if we are allowing ourselves to be invaded by facticity, that we cease to flee from it and we slide, instead, into a passive consent to the desire.  At other times it can seem as if consciousness is invaded by facticity even as it seeks to flee it, and becomes opaque to itself.  It is like a pasty upheaval of fact .  The phrases that we use to refer to desire also record this particularity.  We say that it overcomes you, that it submerges you, that it numbs you.  Can we imagine using the same words to refer to hunger? Do we think of hunger as submerging us? With the possible exception of a description of the impact of starvation, that would make no sense.  But, on the contrary, even the weakest desire can already submerge us.  Unlike hunger, we are not able to hold it at a distance and “think about something else” while we maintain our desire as an indistinct tone, like a sign coming from the body-ground.  Rather, to desire is to consent to desire .  Our weighed-down consciousness swoons, and slides into a state of languor comparable to sleep.  Each of us has observed, moreover, the terrifying effects of desire in someone else: a man in a state of desire will suddenly become heavily tranquilized; his staring eyes will appear to be half-shut, and his movements bear the stamp of a heavy and pasty contentment; often he will seem to have fallen asleep.  And when we “fight against desire” the object of our resistance is precisely this torpor.  If we succeed in our resistance, our desire will, before it disappears, become crisp and clear like hunger, and then we will “wake up” and find ourselves lucid, but with a heavy head and a pounding heart.  All these descriptions, of course, miss their mark: what they really show is our way of interpreting desire.  They do, however, point to desire’s central fact: in desiring, consciousness chooses to exist its facticity at another level.  It no longer flees its facticity but it attempts to submit to its own contingency, insofar as it apprehends another body—in other words, another contingency—as desirable.  In this sense, desire does not merely disclose the Other’s body; it reveals my own body as well.  And the body is revealed not as an instrument or as a point of view but in its pure facticity, i.e., as the simple, contingent form of the necessity of my contingency.  I feel my skin and my muscles and my breath, but I do not feel them in order to transcend them toward something—as in the case of emotion or appetite—but as a living and inert datum ; I do not feel them simply as the supple and unobtrusive instrument of my action on the world but as a passion through which I am committed, and in danger, within the world.  The for-itself is not this contingency, it continues to exist it, but it undergoes the vertigo of its own body or, as we may prefer to say, this vertigo is precisely its way of existing its body.  Non-thetic consciousness gives itself up to the body; it wants to be its body and to be nothing but body.  In desire, the body—instead of being no more than the contingency from which the for-itself flees toward its own possibles—simultaneously becomes the for-itself’s most immediate possible: desire is not only a desire for the Other’s body; it is, within the unity of a single act, the non-thetically lived pro-ject of sinking into one’s body.  In this way, the act of fainting may constitute the utmost degree of desire, as the utmost degree of one’s consent to one’s body.  It is in this sense that desire can be said to be one body’s desire for another body.  It is indeed an appetite toward the Other’s body, which is lived as the for-itself’s vertigo in relation to its own body; and the being who desires is a consciousness making itself body .  But if it is true that desire is a consciousness that makes itself body in order to appropriate the Other’s body, which is apprehended as an organic totality in situation, with consciousness at its horizon, what does desire mean? In other words: Why does consciousness make itself—or try in vain to make itself—body, and what does it expect from the object of its desire? It will be easy to answer this if we reflect on the fact that, in desire, I make myself flesh in the presence of the Other in order to appropriate the Other’s flesh .  That implies that it is not sufficient merely to take hold of someone’s shoulders, or of her side, or to draw her body alongside me: these parts must in addition be grasped by means of that specific instrument, my body, insofar as it thickens my consciousness.  In this sense, one might say that it is not just that, in taking hold of these shoulders, my body is a means for touching the shoulders but rather that the Other’s shoulders are a means for me to disclose my body as a fascinating revelation of my facticity, i.e., as flesh.  Desire, therefore, is the desire to appropriate a body insofar as this appropriation reveals my body to me in the form of flesh.  But what I want, when I want to appropriate this body, is to appropriate it as flesh .  Now, that is not what it is for me in the first instance: the Other’s body appears as a synthetic form in actuality; as we have seen, we cannot perceive the Other’s body as pure flesh, i.e., as an isolated object whose relations to the other “ thises ” are external.  The Other’s body is from the outset a body in situation; flesh, on the contrary, appears as the pure contingency of presence .  Ordinarily it is covered by scarves and clothes, etc.; above all, a person’s movements cover it from view; nothing presents itself “in its flesh” less than a dancer, even a naked one.  Desire is an attempt to strip the body of its movements along with its clothes, and to make it exist as pure flesh; it is an attempt to incarnate the Other’s body.  It is in this sense that a caress is an appropriation of the Other’s body: it is obvious that, if a caress is supposed only to skim or to skirt the surface of the body, it can bear no relation to the powerful desire it is supposed to fulfill.  A caress, like a glance, remains at the surface; it is not able to appropriate someone else.  We are familiar with the anticlimax of that well-known phrase “the contact of two epidermises.” 14 A caress does not merely want to make contact ; it appears that only man can reduce it to that, and in doing so he misses its true meaning.  In fact a caress is not merely a skimming of the surface: it is an act of modeling .  In caressing the Other I give birth to her flesh, through my caress, beneath my fingers.  A caress is the set of rituals that incarnates the Other.  But, it might be asked, was she not incarnated already? No : that is my point.  The Other’s flesh did not exist for me explicitly, since I apprehended the Other’s body in situation; neither did it exist for her, since she transcended it toward her possibilities, and toward the object.  Out of my caress the Other is born as flesh—for me and for herself.  And by “flesh” we do not mean a part of the body, such as the dermis, the connective tissue or, indeed, the epidermis; nor is it important that the body be “at rest,” or drowsy—although its flesh often shows up better that way.  But it is in stripping the body of its actions that the caress reveals the flesh, in severing it from the possibilities that surround it: a caress is designed to uncover, beneath the action, the backdrop of inertia—i.e., the pure “being-there”—that supports it.  For example, in taking and caressing another’s hand I encounter, beneath the prehension that at first defines the hand, an expanse of flesh and bone that I can hold; in the same way, my act of looking is a caress when it uncovers—beneath the jump that first presents the dancer’s legs—the lunar expanse of her thighs.  Thus the caress is not distinct from desire: to caress someone with one’s eyes and to desire her are one and the same; the caress expresses desire, as language expresses thought .  And indeed the caress reveals the Other’s flesh as flesh to me and to the Other .  But it reveals this flesh in a quite specific way: we might reveal someone’s inertia to her, and her passivity as a transcended-transcendence, by grabbing hold of her—but that is not how a caress works.  In caressing the Other, my body is not a synthetic form in actuality, caressing her; rather, it is my fleshed body that gives birth to the Other’s flesh.  The point of the caress is to give rise, through the pleasure it occasions, to the Other’s body; she is born, to herself and to me, as a passivity that has been touched , to the extent that my body makes itself flesh in order to touch her with its own passivity, i.e., by letting itself be caressed alongside her, rather than by caressing her.  That is why the movements of love have a languor that appears almost studied: rather than taking hold of a part of the other’s body, one carries one’s own body to place it against the other’s body; rather than pushing or touching in any active sense, one sets alongside .  It seems as if I carry my own arm like an inanimate object and I set it down by the side of the woman I desire, and as if the fingers that I run across her arm are inert at the end of my hand.  Thus the revelation of the Other’s flesh takes place through my own flesh; in my desire and in the caress that expresses it, I incarnate myself in order to actualize the Other’s incarnation, and my caress, in actualizing the Other’s incarnation, discloses my own incarnation to me; in other words I make myself flesh in order to lead the other to actualize her own flesh for herself and for me , and my caresses give birth to my flesh for me insofar as it is, for the Other, flesh that gives birth to her as flesh ; I get her to taste my flesh with her flesh, in order to oblige her to feel herself to be flesh.  And, in this way, possession appears in its true form as a twofold reciprocal incarnation .  Thus desire involves an attempt to incarnate consciousness (which is what we referred to earlier as a “thickening” of consciousness, a troubled consciousness, etc.), in order to actualize the other’s incarnation.  We still have to determine desire’s motive or, alternatively, its meaning.  That is because (as anyone who has followed the descriptions we have offered so far will long since have understood) to be, for the for-itself, is to choose its way of being, against the ground of the absolute contingency of its being-there.  Desire does not therefore happen to consciousness, in the way that heat happens to the piece of iron that I bring closer to the flame.  Consciousness chooses itself as desire.  Of course, for that to happen there will normally be a motive: I do not desire just anyone, at any time.  But we have shown, in Part One of this book, that a motive arises on the basis of the past, and that consciousness, by turning back toward it, bestows on it its weight and value.  There is no difference, therefore, between our choice of the motive for our desire and the meaning of a consciousness that—arising in the three ecstatic dimensions of duration—makes itself desirous.  Desire, like emotion, or the attitude of imagination or—quite generally—all the for-itself’s attitudes, has a meaning that constitutes it and surpasses it.  The description that we have just undertaken would lack all interest if it did not lead us next to ask the question: Why does consciousness nihilate itself in the form of desire? A couple of preliminary observations will help us to answer this question.  In the first place, we should note that the desiring consciousness does not desire its object against the ground of an unchanged world.  In other words, the aim here is not to bring the desirable object into view as a particular this , against the ground of a world whose instrumental relations with us and whose organization in terms of structures of equipment remain the same.  Desire works like emotion: we have observed elsewhere 15 that emotion does not apprehend the object by which it is moved in an unchanged world but rather that it corresponds to a global modification of consciousness and of its relations with the world, and manifests itself therefore as a radical alteration of the world.  Similarly, desire is a radical modification of the for-itself, since the for-itself moves to a new plane of being to make itself be, and sets itself to exist its body in a different way, to become thickened with its own facticity.  For the for-itself, correlatively, the world must also come to being in a new way: desire has its own world.  Indeed, if my body is no longer felt as the instrument of which no other instrument can make use—i.e., as the synthetic organization of my actions in the world—if it is lived as flesh, I will apprehend the objects in the world as references back to my flesh.  In other words, I make myself passive in relation to them, and they are revealed within that perspective, through this passivity and in it (as the passivity is the body, and the body does not cease to be a point of view).  In this case it is the transcendent collection of objects that reveals my incarnation to me.  A contact is a caress , which means my perception of the object does not use it, and surpass the present in pursuit of an end; rather, within the attitude of desire, to perceive an object is to let myself be caressed by it.  I hereby become more sensitive to the object’s matter (lumpy, smooth, warm, greasy, rough, etc.) than to its form and to its instrumentality and, in my desiring perception, I uncover something like the objects’ flesh .  My shirt rubs against my skin and I feel it: this shirt, which is ordinarily the most distant of objects, becomes immediately sensible to me; the warmth of the air, the blowing of the wind, the rays of the sun, etc.—everything is in some way present to me, as if placed right up against me, and revealing my flesh through its flesh.  From this point of view desire is not only the thickening of a consciousness with its own facticity: it is, correlatively, the body’s coming to be bogged down in the world, and the world becoming bog-like; consciousness becomes stuck in a body that becomes stuck in the world.  16 Here, therefore, the proposed ideal is that of being-in-the-midst-of-the-world; the for-itself tries to actualize its being-in-the-midst-of-the-world as the ultimate project of its being-in-the-world; that is why sexual bliss is so frequently associated with death—which is also a metamorphosis, a state of “being-in-the-midst-of the-world.” We are familiar, for example, with the theme of the “false death” so thoroughly explored in all literatures.  17 But desire is not first and foremost a relation to the world.  The world is only the ground against which my relations with the other explicitly appear.  Usually it is the occasion of the other’s presence that discloses the world as a world of desire.  Derivatively, it may take on that appearance when some particular other is absent—or even when there is a complete absence of any other person.  But we have already noted that absence is a concrete existential relationship between the other and myself that appears against the original ground of my being-for-the-Other.  It is of course possible that, encountering my body when I am on my own, I suddenly feel myself to be flesh, to be “suffocated” by desire, and to apprehend the world as “suffocating.” But this solitary desire is a call for someone else, or for the presence of an undifferentiated other.  I desire to reveal myself as flesh through and for another flesh.  I try to cast a spell over the other, and to make him appear; and the world of desire points, in the empty space that is left for him, to the other I am calling for.  Thus desire is in no way a physiological accident, a pruritus in the flesh that makes us fix randomly on the other’s flesh.  Rather, and quite to the contrary, in order for there to be my flesh and the other’s flesh, my consciousness must antecedently have flowed into the mold of desire.  This desire is a primitive mode of my relations with the Other, constituting the other as desirable flesh against the ground of a world of desire.  We are now in a position to elucidate desire’s innermost meaning.  My primary reaction to the Other’s look is, in effect, to constitute myself as looking.  But if I look at her look, in order to defend myself against the Other’s freedom and to transcend it as a freedom, the Other’s freedom and her look will both collapse: I see her eyes ; I see a being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  Henceforth, the other will escape me: I wanted to act upon her freedom, to appropriate it, or, at the least, to make this freedom recognize mine, but now it has died, and it has absolutely ceased to be in the world where I meet the other-object, for it is characterized by its transcending of the world.  Of course I can take hold of the other, grab her, or push her; I can—if I have the power—force her to perform certain acts or to utter certain words, but it is as if I were trying to take hold of a man who is running away, leaving me with his coat in my hands.  What I possess is the man’s coat, his remains; I will only ever take hold of a body, a psychological object in the midst of the world, and, although all of this body’s actions can be interpreted in terms of freedom, I have entirely lost the key to this interpretation: I can act only on a facticity.  If I retain my knowledge of the Other’s transcendent freedom, this knowledge is a useless annoyance, pointing to a reality that is necessarily beyond my reach, and revealing that at every moment I am missing it, that in everything I do I am “blindfolded,” and that my action acquires its meaning elsewhere—in a sphere of existence from which I am necessarily excluded.  I can make someone cry for mercy or beg forgiveness, but I will remain forever ignorant of the meaning of this submission for, and in, the other’s freedom.  At the same time, moreover, my knowledge deteriorates: I lose a clear understanding of the state of being-looked-at which is, as we know, the only way in which I can experience the other’s freedom.  Thus I have forgotten even the meaning of the enterprise in which I am committed.  Confronted with this other—whom I see and can touch—I am lost, and I no longer know what to do with her.  I may just about retain a vague memory of a certain beyond in relation to the thing I can see and touch, a “beyond” that is—I know—exactly what I want to appropriate.  At this point, I make myself desire .  Desire is an action whose aim is to cast a spell.  Its point, since I am able to grasp the other only in her objective facticity, is to mire her freedom within that facticity: it must be made to “set” within it—as we might say of a custard that it has “set”—so that the Other’s for-itself reaches to the surface of her body, so that it extends throughout her body and so that, in touching this body, I can at last touch the other’s free subjectivity.  That is the true meaning of the word “possession.” Of course, I want to possess the other’s body, but I want to possess it insofar as it has itself become “possessed,” i.e., insofar as the other’s consciousness has become identified with it.  Such is desire’s impossible ideal: to possess the other’s transcendence purely as a transcendence and yet as a body ; to reduce the other to her mere facticity , because then she exists in the midst of my world, but to make it happen that this facticity constantly appresents her nihilating transcendence.  But the truth is that it is not possible for the other’s facticity (her pure being-there) to be given to my intuition without a thoroughgoing modification of my own-being.  As long as I surpass my personal facticity toward my own possibilities, as long as I exist my facticity through a movement of flight, I also surpass the other’s facticity—just as, moreover, I surpass the pure existence of things .  In my very arising, I make them emerge in their instrumental existence; their pure and simple being is concealed by the complexity of the referential relations by which their workability and their equipmentality are constituted.  In picking up a penholder, I already surpass my being-there toward the possibility of writing, but I am also surpassing the penholder as a mere existent toward its potential and, again, I surpass that potential toward the existence of various items in the future, i.e., the “words to be written down” and, eventually, the “book to be written.” That is why the being of existents is usually concealed by their function.  The same goes for the being of the other: if the other appears to me as a servant, an employee, a bureaucrat, or merely as the passerby whom I must avoid, or as that voice speaking in the neighboring room that I am trying to understand (or, on the contrary, that I want to forget about, because it is “stopping me from sleeping”), it is not only her extraworldly transcendence that escapes me but also her “being-there” as a pure contingent existence in the midst of the world.  That is because, precisely insofar as I treat her as a servant or an office worker, I surpass her toward her potentialities (a transcended-transcendence, dead-possibilities), through the very project through which I surpass and nihilate my own facticity.  If I want to get back to her simple presence and to taste it as presence , I will have to try to reduce myself to my own presence.  Any surpassing of my being-there is, in effect, a surpassing of the other’s being-there.  And if the world surrounds me as the situation that I surpass toward myself, I will apprehend the other on the basis of her situation , i.e., already as a center of reference.  And of course the desired other must also be apprehended in situation: what I desire is a woman in the world , standing near a table , naked on a bed, or seated at my side .  But if desire flows back from the situation toward the being who is in situation, it does so in order to dissolve the situation and to erode the Other’s relations within the world: the movement of desire that goes from the “surroundings” to the desired person isolates her; it destroys those surroundings and encircles the person in question, in order to make her pure facticity stand out.  But for that to be possible, each of the objects that refers back to the person must, precisely, and at the same time as it points her out to me, become frozen in its pure contingency; and in consequence this movement back toward the Other’s being is a movement back toward myself, as a pure being-there.  I destroy my possibilities in order to destroy the world’s possibilities, and to constitute the world as the “world of desire”—i.e., as a world that has lost its structure, having lost its meaning, and in which things stick out like fragments of pure matter, like brute qualities.  And as the for-itself is choice, that is possible only if I pro-ject myself toward a new possibility: that of being “sucked into my body like ink into blotting paper,” of being summed up in my pure being-there.  This project, insofar as it is not merely conceived and presented thematically but lived—i.e., insofar as its actualization cannot be distinguished from its conception—is my being troubled .  18 In point of fact, it would be a mistake to take the preceding descriptions to imply that I deliberately put myself into a state of trouble, with the intention of rediscovering the other’s pure “being-there.” Desire is a lived pro-ject that does not require any preliminary deliberation; rather, it carries its meaning and its interpretation within itself.  The moment I throw myself in the direction of another’s facticity, the moment I want to set aside her actions and her duties in order to reach her in her flesh, I incarnate myself, because I can neither want nor conceive of the other’s incarnation other than through and in my own incarnation; and even an empty sketch of desire (as when we absentmindedly “undress a woman with our eyes”) is an outline of my troubled state—for I can desire only with my arousal; it is only by undressing myself that I can undress the other, and I can sketch and outline the other only by sketching my own flesh.  But my incarnation is not only the precondition for the other’s appearance as flesh before my eyes .  My aim is to incarnate her in her own eyes as flesh, so I must drag her on to the terrain of pure facticity; she must be summed up for herself as being no more than flesh.  Thus might I be reassured about the constant possibilities of a transcendence able at any instant to transcend me entirely: it will be no more than this; it will remain contained within the limits of an object; by virtue of this very fact, moreover, I will be able to touch this transcendence, to feel it, to possess it.  The other meaning therefore of my incarnation—i.e., of my troubled state—is that it speaks a spellbinding language.  I make myself flesh in order to fascinate the Other through my nudity and to provoke in her the desire for my flesh, just because this desire will be—in the other—nothing but an incarnation that resembles my own.  In this way desire is an invitation to desire.  The only way to the Other’s flesh is through my flesh, and I place my flesh against her flesh in order to awaken it to the meaning of flesh.  In fact, when I caress the other, when I slowly slide my inert hand against her side, I make her feel my flesh and she can only do that, herself, by becoming inert; the tingle of pleasure that runs through her in that moment is, precisely, the awakening of her consciousness of flesh.  If I stretch out my hand, move it away, or clench it, I return to my body in actuality—but at the same time I make my hand as flesh vanish.  In allowing my hand gradually to flow down her body, turning it into a gentle brushing movement, almost without meaning—a pure existence, a pure instance of matter, something a bit like silk, a bit like satin, slightly gritty—I give up being the person who determines landmarks and unfolds distances, and I become pure mucus.  At this moment, the communion of desire is achieved: each consciousness, by becoming incarnate, has brought about the other’s incarnation; each arousal has given birth to the other’s arousal and thereby increased its own.  In each caress I can feel my own flesh, and the other’s flesh through my own flesh, and I am conscious that this flesh that I feel and appropriate through my flesh is flesh that is felt-by-the-other.  And it is no coincidence that desire—even though it aims at an entire body—succeeds especially in making contact with it through the areas of flesh that are the least differentiated, the most crudely supplied with nerves, the least capable of spontaneous movement: through the breasts, buttocks, thighs, and belly, which are like an image of pure facticity.  It is for that reason, also, that the truest caress consists in the contact made by the most carnal parts of the two bodies, the contact of stomachs and chests: after all, a caressing hand is an agile thing, too close to being a honed tool, but the opening up of one flesh against the other, of one flesh through the other, is desire’s true aim.  Nevertheless, desire is itself doomed to failure.  We have seen that the act of coitus, which usually brings desire to an end, is not in fact its distinctive aim.  There are of course several elements within our sexual structure, and especially the erections of the penis and the clitoris, which necessarily give expression to the nature of desire.  Indeed an erection is nothing but an affirmation of flesh through flesh.  It is therefore absolutely necessary that it should not be voluntary , in other words, such that we could employ it as an instrument—but rather that it is, on the contrary, an instance of a biological and autonomous phenomenon whose autonomous and involuntary expansion accompanies and signifies the movement through which consciousness becomes bogged down within the body.  What needs to be understood is that no organ that is agile, prehensile, and connected to striated muscles could ever be a sexual organ, or someone’s sex ; 19 if sex were to appear in the form of an organ, it could not be anything more than a manifestation of vegetative life.  But contingency comes back in once we consider that, indeed, there are sexes—and sexes such as these .  In particular, the male’s penetration of the female—even though it is consistent with the radical incarnation that desire wishes to be (and we should take note, indeed, of the organic passivity of the sexual organ in coitus: it is the entire body that comes forward and moves back, which carries the sexual organ forward or withdraws it; it is our hands that help with the intromission of the penis; the penis itself appears as an instrument to be handled, an instrument that one pushes forward, pulls back, and uses, and in the same way the opening up and lubrication of the vagina cannot be voluntarily brought about)—remains a perfectly contingent modality of our sexual life.  And another purely contingent element is sexual pleasure, in the proper sense of the term.  The fact is that the state in which consciousness becomes bogged down within the body normally reaches its conclusion—i.e., a particular kind of ecstasy, in which consciousness is no longer anything but consciousness (of the) body—and, in consequence, becomes a reflective consciousness of embodiment.  20 Indeed our pleasure—like a pain that is too intense—motivates the appearance of reflective consciousness, which pays “ attention to the pleasure .” Only the pleasure is the death of desire, and its failure.  It is the death of desire because it is not only its completion but its limit and its end.  Moreover, this is only an organic contingency: it so happens that our incarnation is manifested in an erection, and that the erection ends with ejaculation.  But, in addition, pleasure opens the floodgate to desire because it motivates the appearance of a reflective consciousness of pleasure, whose object becomes the orgasm, i.e., an attention to the incarnation of the for-itself that is now reflected on and, by the same token, a forgetting of the other’s incarnation.  This no longer belongs in the domain of contingency.  Of course, the fact that the move into fascinated reflection is occasioned by pleasure, by that specific mode of incarnation, remains contingent—and there are many cases where the transition into reflection occurs without the intervention of desire—but in desire, insofar as it is an attempt at incarnation, there is the constant danger that consciousness, in becoming incarnate, will lose sight of the other’s incarnation, and that its own incarnation will absorb it to the extent of becoming its ultimate aim.  In this case, the pleasure of caressing is transformed into the pleasure at being caressed, and what the for-itself demands is to feel its body opening out within it, even to the point of nausea.  With that, the contact is broken and desire fails in its aim.  It may even happen quite often that this failure on the part of desire motivates a move to masochism, which is to say that consciousness, apprehending itself in its facticity, demands to be apprehended and transcended by the other’s consciousness as a body-for-the-Other through the other.  In this case the object-other collapses and the other-look appears, and my consciousness becomes a consciousness swooning in its flesh, before the other’s gaze.  But, conversely, desire lies at the origin of its own failure insofar as it is the desire to take and to appropriate .  It is not enough, it turns out, that my own troubled state should give rise to the other’s incarnation: desire is the desire to appropriate that incarnate consciousness.  It is naturally prolonged, therefore, not by means of caresses but by prehensile and penetrative acts.  The caress had as its only aim to impregnate the other’s body with consciousness and freedom.  But now that the body is saturated, I must take it, grab hold of it, enter inside it.  But simply by virtue of my present attempts to grasp, to drag, to take hold, and to bite, my body ceases to be flesh; it returns to being the synthetic instrument that I am ; and, with that, the other ceases to be an incarnation: she goes back to being an instrument in the midst of the world that I apprehend on the basis of her situation.  Her consciousness—which had risen to the surface of her flesh, and which I was trying to taste 21 with my flesh—vanishes as I look at her: it remains no more than an object , containing object-images inside it.  At the same time my troubled state disappears: this does not mean I have stopped desiring but that the desire has lost its materiality, and has become abstract ; it is a desire to handle and to take, and I persist in taking—but my very persistence makes my incarnation disappear.  Now I am surpassing, once again, my body toward my own possibilities (the possibility, here, of taking) and, in the same way, the Other’s body, surpassed toward its potentialities, descends from the level of flesh to that of a pure object.  It is implicit in this situation that the reciprocal incarnation—which was, precisely, desire’s distinctive goal—will be broken.  The other may remain troubled; she may remain as flesh for herself ; and that I can understand; but it is a flesh that I can no longer apprehend through my own flesh, a flesh that is no longer anything but a property of the object-other, and not the incarnation of an other-consciousness.  Thus I am a body (a synthetic totality in situation), confronting a flesh .  I find myself more or less in just the situation that I was trying, through my desire, to leave, i.e., I am trying to make use of the Other-object to make her account for her transcendence and, precisely because she is entirely an object, her transcendence eludes me entirely .  I have even, once again, lost any clear understanding of what I was seeking, and yet I am committed to seeking it.  I take, and I encounter myself in the act of taking, but what I have in my hands is other than the thing I wanted to take; I feel this and I suffer through it, but I am incapable of saying what it was that I wanted to take because, along with my troubled arousal, even my understanding of my desire escapes me; I am like someone who, waking from his sleep, finds himself clenching his hands on the edge of his bed—without being able to remember the nightmare that induced his action.  This is the situation that lies at the origin of sadism .  Sadism implies passion, aridity, and persistence.  It is persistent because it is a state of a for-itself that grasps itself as committed to something without understanding what it is committed to, and which persists in its commitment without having either any clear awareness of the goal it has adopted, or any precise recollection of the value placed on this commitment.  It is arid because it appears when desire has been emptied of its trouble.  The sadist has rediscovered his body as a synthetic totality, and a center of action; he has returned to the constant flight from his own facticity; confronted with the other, he experiences himself as a pure transcendence, and is horrified for his sake by his troubled state, which he considers to be humiliating; it is also possible that he is quite simply unable to actualize it in himself.  To the extent that he coldly persists, that he is persistent and arid at the same time, the sadist is impassioned.  His goal, like that of desire, is to apprehend and enslave the other not only as an object-other but as a pure transcendence made incarnate.  But, with sadism, the emphasis is placed on the instrumental appropriation of the incarnate-other.  In fact the sadistic “moment,” within sexuality, is when the for-itself that has become incarnate surpasses its incarnation in order to appropriate the other’s incarnation.  Sadism is, therefore, both a refusal to become incarnate, and the flight from any kind of facticity—and at the same time an attempt to take hold of the other’s facticity.  But, as the sadist cannot, and does not want to, actualize the other’s incarnation through his own incarnation and as, by virtue of this very fact, his only recourse is that of treating the other as an implement-object, he tries to use the other’s body as a tool to actualize the other’s incarnate existence.  Sadism is an endeavor to make the Other incarnate through violence, and this “forced” incarnation must already involve the appropriation and the use of the other.  The sadist seeks—as in desire—to strip the other of the actions that conceal her.  He tries to uncover the flesh beneath the action.  But whereas, in desire, the for-itself loses itself in its own flesh in order to disclose to the Other that she is flesh, the sadist rejects his own flesh, while at the same time arranging his instruments in order to force the other to reveal her flesh.  The object of sadism is immediate appropriation.  But the sadist’s position is precarious, for he does not take pleasure only in the other’s flesh but, in his direct contact with that flesh, also in his own non-incarnation.  He wants the non-reciprocity of the sexual relations; he takes pleasure in being an appropriative and free power confronted with a freedom made captive by flesh.  That is why the sadist wants to presentify flesh in another way to the Other’s consciousness: he wants to presentify it by treating the Other as an instrument; he presentifies it through pain.  In pain, facticity effectively takes consciousness over and eventually reflective consciousness becomes fascinated by the facticity of unreflected consciousness.  So incarnation is indeed possible through pain.  But at the same time the pain is obtained through instruments ; the body of the supplicant for-itself has become no more than an instrument for producing pain.  In this way the for-itself can from the outset be under the illusion of having taken instrumental hold of the other’s freedom—that is, of having decanted that freedom into flesh without ceasing to be the one who provokes , who grabs hold, who grasps, etc.  As for the type of incarnation that sadism would like to actualize, it corresponds exactly to what we describe as “ obscenity .” The obscene is a species of being-for-the-Other that belongs to the genus of the ungraceful.  But not all ungraceful things are obscene.  When a body appears with grace , it shows itself as a psyche in situation.  Above all, it reveals its transcendence, as a transcended-transcendence; it is in actuality, and it is to be understood on the basis of the situation and the pursued end.  Each movement, therefore, is grasped within a perceptual process that moves from the future to the present.  Accordingly, a graceful action has on the one hand the precision of a well-adapted machine and, on the other, the supreme unpredictability of the psyche, since—as we have seen—the psyche is, for the Other, the unpredictable object .  A graceful action is therefore perfectly comprehensible insofar as we consider the element within it that has flowed .  22 Better still, this flowing part of the action is underpinned by a sort of aesthetic necessity implied by its perfect adaptation.  At the same time, the future goal illuminates the act in its totality; but the whole of the future dimension of the act remains unpredictable, even though one has the sense—from the body itself as it is in actuality—that as soon as it has flowed by it will appear as necessary and well adapted.  This moving image of necessity and freedom (as a property of the object-other) is what constitutes, in the true sense of the word, grace.  Bergson gave us a good description of it.  The graceful body is an instrument that manifests freedom.  The graceful action, insofar as it reveals the body as a precision tool, provides it at each moment with its justification for existing: the hand is for taking hold and exhibits in the first instance its being-in-order-to-take-hold.  Insofar as it is apprehended on the basis of a situation that requires prehension, it appears itself to be required in its being, to be called for .  And insofar as it manifests its freedom through the unpredictability of its movement, its being appears to originate within it: it is as if it produces itself in response to the justifying call made by the situation.  Grace figures therefore as the objective image of a being that could be its own foundation in order to … Grace, therefore, clothes and conceals facticity: the nakedness of the flesh is present in its entirety, but it cannot be seen .  It follows that the most extreme act of teasing, and grace’s hardest challenge, is to exhibit one’s body unveiled, without clothing, veiled by nothing other than grace itself.  The most gracious body is the naked body, whose acts surround it with an invisible garment while robbing it of its flesh, even though its flesh is wholly present to the spectators’ view.  The moment when the ungracious appears, on the contrary, is when an element of grace is hindered in its movement.  The movement may become mechanical .  In this case, the body remains part of a whole that justifies it, but in the capacity of a mere instrument; its transcended-transcendence disappears, and with it the situation (as it laterally over-determines the implement-objects of my universe) also vanishes.  The actions may also be jerky and violent; in this case, what collapses is the adaptation to the situation.  The situation remains, but it is as if a gap, a hiatus, has slipped between it and the other in situation.  In this case, the other remains free, but this freedom is grasped only in the form of pure unpredictability and it resembles the clinamen of Epicurean atoms 23 or—in a word—indeterminism.  At the same time, the action’s end continues to be posited, and we continue to perceive the other’s movement on the basis of the future.  But the consequence of the maladaptation is that the perceptual interpretation in terms of the future is always either too wide or too narrow: it is a more or less interpretation.  In consequence, the justification of the other’s movement and being is imperfectly achieved: in the end, a clumsy person is unjustifiable; all his facticity—which was committed within, and absorbed by, the situation—turns back on him.  A clumsy person liberates his facticity inopportunely and suddenly places it before our eyes: just when we were expecting to grasp a key to the situation, emanating spontaneously from the situation itself, we suddenly encounter the unjustifiable contingency of a maladapted presence; we are confronted with the existence of an existent.  Nonetheless, while the body remains entirely in action, its facticity does not yet amount to flesh.  Obscenity appears when the body adopts postures that unclothe it entirely of its actions and reveal the inertia of its flesh.  The sight of a naked body, from behind, is not obscene.  But some kinds of involuntary waddling movements of the rump are obscene.  For here it is the walker’s legs alone that are active, and the rump they are carrying seems like an isolated cushion, whose swinging movement merely obeys the laws of gravity.  This rump cannot be justified by the situation; on the contrary, it is wholly destructive of any situation, since it has the passivity of a thing and is carried like a thing by the legs.  All at once it presents itself as unjustifiable facticity; like all contingent beings, it is “ de trop .” It is isolated within this body whose present meaning is walking; even if some fabric veils it, it is naked, for it no longer participates in the transcended-transcendence of the body in actuality; its pendulum movement, rather than being interpreted on the basis of something forth-coming, 24 is interpreted and known on the basis of the past, like a physical fact.  Naturally these observations may also apply to cases where it is the whole body that becomes flesh, whether this be through some limpness in its movements that cannot be interpreted by means of the situation, or through a deformation of its structure (for example, a proliferation of fat cells) that exhibits an overabundant facticity in relation to the effective presence required by the situation.  And this revealed flesh is especially obscene when the person who encounters it is not in a state of desire and whose desire is not excited .  A particular maladaptation, destroying the situation at the very moment in which I grasp it—and which delivers up to me the flesh’s inert expansion beneath the thin clothing of the movements in which it is dressed—and at a time when I am not, in relation to this flesh, in a state of desire: that is what I call “obscene.” Now we can see the meaning of the sadist’s demand: grace reveals freedom as the property of an object-other and obscurely refers—like the contradictions within the sensible world in a case of Platonic recollection—to a transcendent beyond of which we retain only a vague memory, and that we can reach only by means of a radical modification of our being, i.e., by resolutely taking on our being-for-the-Other.  At the same time, it unveils and veils the other’s flesh or, alternatively, it unveils it in order immediately to veil it again: where the flesh is graceful, the other is inaccessible.  The sadist aims to destroy the state of grace in order to constitute— in reality —another synthesis of the other: he wants to make the Other’s flesh appear; in its very act of appearing, the flesh will destroy grace, and facticity will absorb the other’s object-freedom.  This absorption is not an annihilation: for the sadist, the other-as-free is manifested as flesh; the identity of the other-object is not destroyed in the course of these metamorphoses, but the relations between flesh and freedom are reversed.  In the state of grace, facticity was contained and veiled by freedom; in the new synthesis to be performed, it is facticity that contains and conceals freedom.  The sadist aims, therefore, to make the flesh appear brusquely, and by means of force, i.e., without the help of his own flesh, but by using his body as an instrument.  He aims to make the other adopt postures and positions such that her body takes on the aspect of the obscene ; in this way he remains at the level of instrumental appropriation, since he engenders the flesh by acting on the other with force, and the other becomes an instrument between his hands—the sadist handles the other’s body, leans on her shoulders to bend her toward the ground, to make her back stick out, etc.  And, on the other hand, the goal of this instrumental use is immanent within the use itself: the sadist treats the other as an instrument in order to make the other’s flesh appear; the sadist is the being who apprehends the other as an instrument whose function is her own incarnation.  The sadist’s ideal is therefore to reach the point where the other has already become flesh without ceasing to be an instrument—a flesh giving birth to flesh—where, for example, the thighs are already offered up in an obscene and expansive passivity and are still instruments to be handled, which can be pulled apart and bent, in order to make the buttocks stick out further and to make them incarnate in their turn.  But we should not get this wrong: what the sadist is seeking with such persistence, what he wants to shape with his hands and to bend beneath his fist, is the other’s freedom: it is there, within this flesh and, since there is a facticity to the other, it is this flesh; what the sadist is trying to appropriate, therefore, is freedom.  In this way the sadist’s endeavor is, through violence and through pain, to bog down the other in her flesh while he appropriates the other’s body by virtue of treating it as flesh that will engender flesh; but this appropriation surpasses the body it appropriates, because it wants to possess it only to the extent that it has the other’s freedom mired within it.  That is why the sadist wants visible proof of this enslavement, through flesh, of the other’s freedom: he will aim to make the other beg forgiveness; by means of torture and threats he will compel her to humiliate herself, to renounce what she holds most dear.  This, it has been claimed, is because of his taste for domination, the will to power.  But this explanation is vague or absurd.  What ought to be explained first is the taste for domination.  And, precisely, this taste cannot precede sadism as its foundation, for it exists at the same level and it is born—like sadism—out of anxiety in the face of the other.  Indeed, if the sadist takes pleasure in extracting a renunciation through torture, the reason is analogous to the one that allows us to interpret love’s meaning.  Indeed, we saw that love does not require the other’s freedom to be abolished but to be enslaved insofar as it is free, i.e., freedom’s enslavement by itself.  In the same way, sadism does not seek to eliminate the freedom of the tortured person but to force that freedom to freely identify itself with her tortured flesh.  That is why the moment of pleasure, for the torturer, is when the victim retracts, or is humiliated.  In effect, whatever pressure is brought to bear on the victim, her abjuration remains free : it is a spontaneous production, a response to the situation; it manifests human-reality.  Whatever the victim’s resistance and no matter how long she has waited before begging for mercy, she could have waited, in spite of everything, ten minutes, or one minute, or one second, longer.  She decided on the moment when pain became unbearable.  And the proof of this is that later she will relive this abjuration in remorse and shame.  Thus she is wholly accountable for it.  But, on the other hand, the sadist considers himself at the same time to be the cause.  If the victim resists and refuses to beg for mercy, the game only becomes more enjoyable: one more turn of the screw, an additional twist, and eventually every resistance will give way.  The sadist presents himself as having “all the time in the world.” He is calm, and does not rush; he lays out his instruments like a technician, trying them out one after the other, like a locksmith trying various keys in a lock, and he takes pleasure in this ambiguous and contradictory situation: on the one hand he plays the role of someone patiently making use of means, in the midst of a universal determinism, in pursuit of an end that will come about automatically —like the lock that automatically opens when the locksmith finds the “right” key—and, on the other hand, this determinate end can be actualized only by the other’s free and entire adherence to it.  Therefore it remains both predictable and unpredictable at the same time, and throughout.  And for the sadist, the object achieved is ambiguous, contradictory and unsteady, since it is the strict outcome of a technical use of determinism and—at the same time—the manifestation of an unconditioned freedom.  And the spectacle offered to the sadist is that of a freedom struggling against the expansion of flesh and, eventually, freely choosing to be submerged within the flesh.  In the moment of abjuration, the result that was sought is achieved: the body is completely flesh, breathless and obscene; it remains in the position in which the torturers have put it, not the one it would have adopted by itself; the ropes that bind it support it like an inert thing and, in consequence, it has ceased to be a spontaneously moving object.  And it is with that very body that a freedom chooses, in its abjuration, to identify; this deformed and panting body really is the image of a freedom broken and enslaved.  These notes do not aim to exhaust the problem of sadism.  We merely wish to show that its seed is contained within desire itself, as the failure of desire: indeed, the moment I seek to take the Other’s body, whose incarnation I have induced by making myself incarnate, I break the reciprocity of the incarnation, I surpass my body toward its own possibilities and I move in the direction of sadism.  In this way sadism and masochism are the two reefs of desire, whether I surpass my troubled arousal toward an appropriation of the other’s flesh, or whether—intoxicated by my own trouble—I attend only to my own flesh, and cease to demand anything from the other, apart from that she should look at me, which will help me to actualize my flesh.  It is because of this flimsiness in desire, and its constant oscillation between these two reefs, that we habitually refer to “normal” sexuality as “sado-masochistic.” Nonetheless, sadism itself—like blind indifference and like desire—contains the principle of its own failure.  In the first place, the apprehension of the body as flesh is profoundly incompatible with its instrumental use.  If I make flesh into an instrument, it refers me to other instruments and to potentialities, in short, to a future: its being-there is justified in part by the situation that I create around me—as the presence of nails and the matting to be nailed to the wall justify the existence of the hammer.  Suddenly its nature as flesh (i.e., as unusable facticity) gives way to that of an implement-thing.  The “implement-flesh” structure that the sadist tried to create falls to pieces.  This profound disintegration may be masked, as long as the flesh is an instrument for revealing flesh, because I have thereby constituted an implement whose goal is immanent.  But when the incarnation is complete, when I actually have before me a breathless body, I no longer know how to make use of this flesh: I can no longer assign any goal to it, precisely because I have made its absolute contingency apparent.  It “is there” and its purpose in being there is “nothing.” In consequence, I cannot take hold of it insofar as it is flesh, and I am unable to integrate it within a system of instruments without its materiality as flesh—its “carnation”—immediately escaping me.  I can only remain speechless before it, in a state of contemplative astonishment, or otherwise make myself incarnate in turn, and allow the state of trouble to take me over, in order at least to resituate myself in the territory where flesh discloses itself to flesh in its entire carnation.  25 In this way sadism, in the very moment when its goal is about to be reached, gives way to desire.  Sadism is the failure of desire and desire is the failure of sadism.  The only way out of the circle is through satisfaction, 26 and the so-called physical possession.  This, in fact, offers a new synthesis of sadism and desire: the turgescence of the sexual organ manifests incarnation; the fact of “entering into” or of being “penetrated” symbolically achieves the sadistic and masochistic attempt at appropriation.  But if pleasure allows the circle to be broken, it is because it kills both desire and sadistic passion at the same time, without satisfying them.  At the same time, and on another level entirely, sadism contains a different reason for failure.  In effect, what it seeks to appropriate is the victim’s transcendent freedom.  But it is just this freedom that remains necessarily out of reach.  And the more the sadist insists on treating the other as an instrument, the more this freedom escapes him.  He can act on freedom only as an objective property of the object-other, i.e., freedom in the midst of the world, with its dead-possibilities.  But insofar as his goal is that of recuperating his being-for-the-Other, he will necessarily miss it, because the only Other he comes across is the other within the world, who has nothing but “images in her head” of the sadist who relentlessly persists with her.  The sadist discovers his mistake when the victim looks at him, i.e., when he experiences the absolute alienation of his being in the other’s freedom: at that moment he realizes not only that he has failed to retrieve his “being-outside” but, further, that the activity through which he is trying to retrieve it has itself been transcended and become frozen into “sadism,” as a habitus 27 and as a property, with its cortege of dead-possibilities, and that this transformation has taken place through and for the other whom he wishes to enslave.  He discovers at that moment that he cannot act on the other’s freedom, even by forcing the other to humiliate herself and to beg for mercy, because it is precisely in and through the other’s absolute freedom that a world comes to exist in which there is a sadist, and torture instruments, and a thousand pretexts for humiliating and disavowing himself.  Nobody has given a better account of the power of the victim’s act of looking back at his executioners than Faulkner in the final pages of Light in August .  Some “good people” have just gone after the Negro Christmas and castrated him.  Christmas is dying: But the man on the floor had not moved.  He just lay there, with his eyes open and empty of everything save consciousness, and with something, a shadow, about his mouth.  For a long moment he looked up at them with peaceful and unfathomable and unbearable eyes.  Then his face, body, all, seemed to collapse, to fall in upon itself, and from out the slashed garments about his hips and loins the pent black blood seemed to rush like a released breath… upon that black blast the man seemed to rise soaring into their memories forever and ever.  They are not to lose it, in whatever peaceful valleys, beside whatever placid and reassuring streams of old age, in the mirroring faces of whatever children they will contemplate old disasters and newer hopes.  It will be there, musing, quiet, steadfast, not fading and not particularly threatful, but of itself alone serene, of itself alone triumphant.  28 Again from the town, deadened a little by the walls, the scream of the siren mounted toward its unbelievable crescendo, passing out of the realm of hearing.  29 Hence this explosion of the Other’s gaze within the sadist’s world makes the meaning and the goal of sadism collapse.  At the same time the sadist discovers that it was this freedom-here that he wanted to enslave and, simultaneously, he understands the futility of his efforts.  Once again we are directed from looking-being to being-looked-at ; we have not stepped out of this circle.  In making these observations we have not aimed to exhaust the sexual question, still less that of our attitudes toward the Other.  We merely wanted to note that the sexual attitude is a basic type of behavior in relation to the Other.  It goes without saying that this behavior necessarily includes within it the original contingency of being-for-the-Other, and of our own facticity.  But what we will not accept is that it is governed from the outset by our physiological and empirical constitution.  From the moment that “there is” a body and “there is” the other , our reaction is one of desire , of love —and the derivative attitudes that we have cited.  Our physiological structure only expresses symbolically, and in a sphere of absolute contingency, the possibility that is constantly available to us of taking up one or other of these attitudes.  Thus we can say that the for-itself is sexual even as it arises before the Other and that, through it, sexuality enters the world.  We are not of course claiming that the attitudes we can take up toward the Other can be reduced to those sexual attitudes that we have just described.  If we have enlarged on them at length, it is for two purposes: first, because they are fundamental, and because all of men’s complex ways of behaving toward each other are, in the end, only elaborations of these two primary attitudes (and of a third attitude—hatred—soon to be described).  Without doubt the concrete instances of behavior (collaboration, struggle, rivalry, emulation, commitment, obedience, 30 etc.) are infinitely more delicate to describe, because they depend on the historical situation and the concrete particularities of each for-itself’s relation with the other; but they all contain within themselves, as their skeleton, the relations of sexuality.  And that is not because of the existence of some “ libido ” that we can see creeping into everything but simply because the attitudes we have described are the fundamental projects through which the for-itself actualizes its being-for-the-Other and attempts to transcend this de facto situation.  This is not the place to demonstrate how pity, admiration, disgust, envy, gratitude, etc., can contain love and desire.  But each person may ascertain it by referring to his own experience, and also to the eidetic intuition of these various essences.  This does not imply, of course, that these different attitudes are simply disguised forms of sexuality.  But we must see that sexuality is integrated within them as their foundation, and that they include and surpass it—just as the notion of a circle includes and surpasses that of a segment rotated around one of its fixed endpoints.  These foundation-attitudes may remain concealed, as a skeleton is concealed by the flesh that surrounds it.  That is even what ordinarily happens: the bodies’ contingency, the structure of the original project that I am, the history that I historialize, may make it the case that ordinarily the sexual attitude remains implicit within more complex modes of behavior; in particular, we do not often explicitly desire other people “of the same sex.” But, beneath the prohibitions of morality and social taboos, the primary structure of desire remains—at the least in that particular form of trouble known as sexual disgust.  And we must not interpret this permanence of the sexual project as if it remained “in us” as an unconscious state.  A project of the for-itself can exist only in a conscious form.  Only it exists integrated within, and blending into, some particular structure.  This was what the psychoanalysts sensed when they made sexual affectivity into a “ tabula rasa ,” to be determined entirely by each individual history.  Only we should not believe that sexuality is in its origin undetermined : in fact, all of its determining characteristics accompany it from the moment the for-itself arises in a world where “there are” others.  What remains undetermined, and must be fixed by each person’s history, is the type of relation with the other, in which the sexual attitude (desire-love, masochism-sadism) will be manifested explicitly in its pure form.  It is precisely because these attitudes are primary that we have chosen them to point out the circle of our relations with the Other.  Indeed, as they are an integral part of all our attitudes toward others, their circularity comes to encompass the entirety of all our behavior in relation to the Other.  Just as love encounters its failure within itself, and desire arises from love’s death—to collapse in its turn, and give way to love—each of our ways of behaving in relation to the other-object contains within it an implicit and concealed reference to an other-subject, and in this reference lies their death: with the death of one way of behaving in relation to the other-object a new attitude arises, whose aim is to take hold of the other-subject—and this latter reveals in its turn its own fragility, and collapses to make way for the opposite behavior.  Thus we are indefinitely sent back from the other-object to the other-subject, and vice versa ; we never stop running, and this pursuit, with its sudden reversals of direction, is what constitutes our relation to the Other.  At whichever point we consider it we are in one or the other of these attitudes, as dissatisfied by the one as by the other; we may stay in the attitude we have adopted for a longer or shorter period of time—according to our bad faith, or our particular historical circumstances—but the attitude is never sufficient in itself; it always obscurely points us toward the other one.  The fact is that we could take up a consistent attitude toward the Other only if she were revealed to us at the same time as subject and as object, as a transcending-transcendence and as a transcended-transcendence, which is by definition impossible.  In this way, endlessly thrown from our look-being to our being-looked-at, falling back from each one to the other in alternating upheavals, we are always—whichever attitude we have adopted—in a state of instability in relation to the Other.  We pursue the impossible ideal of simultaneously apprehending her freedom and her objectivity; to put it in Jean Wahl’s terms, we are, in relation to the other, in the state of “trans-descendence” at one moment (when we apprehend her as an object and integrate her within the world) and in a state of “trans-ascendence” at another (when we experience her as a transcendence that transcends us); 31 but neither of these two states is sufficient in itself; and we can never concretely take up a position of equality, i.e., a position in which the recognition of the Other’s freedom might lead to the Other’s recognition of our freedom.  The Other eludes me as a matter of principle: when I seek her, she runs away from me and, when I run away from her, she possesses me.  Even if I wished to act—in accordance with Kantian morality—by taking the Other’s freedom as an unconditioned end, this freedom would become a transcended-transcendence by the very fact of my making it my goal; and on the other hand, I cannot act for her own good unless I make use of the other-object as an instrument in order to actualize this freedom.  I am obliged in fact to grasp the other as an object-instrument in situation; and thus the only power I have will be to modify the situation in relation to the other, and the other in relation to the situation.  Thus I am led to the paradox that is the downfall of all liberal politics and which Rousseau’s phrase sums up: I must “force” the other to be free.  32 This use of force, even if it does not always—or even most often—take the form of violence, is nonetheless what governs men’s relations with each other.  If I console, if I reassure, it is in order to clear away the fears or sorrows that obscure the Other’s freedom; but the consolation, or the reassuring argument, organizes a system of means with the aim of acting on the other and consequently integrating her in turn within the system as an implement-thing.  And, in addition, the person who seeks to console imposes an arbitrary distinction between freedom, which he assimilates to the use of Reason and pursuit of the Good, and affliction, which appears to him to be the result of psychological determinism.  The consoling person acts, therefore, to separate the freedom from the affliction, as one might separate two components of some chemical product from each other.  By the mere fact that he views freedom as something that can be separated out, he transcends it and does violence to it and he is unable, from his standpoint, to grasp this truth: that it is freedom itself which makes itself afflicted and, in consequence, to act in order to liberate freedom from affliction is to act against freedom.  However, it would be wrong to think that a tolerant and “ laissez-faire ” morality would be more respectful of the Other’s freedom: from the moment I exist I place a de facto limit on the Other’s freedom; I am that limit, and each one of my projects draws this limit around the other: charity, laissez-faire , tolerance, or any attitude of abstention; each of these is a project of myself that commits me and commits the Other without her consent.  To exercise tolerance in the Other’s surroundings amounts to forcibly throwing the Other into a tolerant world.  It is necessarily to deprive her of the free possibilities for courageous resistance, perseverance, and self-affirmation that she would have had the opportunity to develop in a world of intolerance.  This becomes clearer still if we consider the problem of education: a strict education treats the child as an instrument, since it attempts to bend him forcibly to submit to values he has not accepted; but a liberal education, despite its use of other methods, chooses a priori , to just the same extent, the principles and values that will be honored in the ways the child is treated.  To treat the child with persuasion and gentleness is no less a way of coercing him.  “Respect for the Other’s freedom” is therefore an empty phrase: even if we were able to form the project of respecting this freedom, every attitude that we took up in relation to the other would violate this freedom that we were claiming to respect.  Nor is the extreme attitude of affecting complete indifference toward the other a solution: we are already thrown into the world alongside the other; our arising is a free limitation of her freedom and nothing—not even suicide—can alter this original situation; whichever acts we perform, in effect, are accomplished in a world in which the other is already there, and in which I am, in relation to the other, de trop .  This singular situation appears to lie at the origin of the notion of guilt and sin.  In the face of the other, I am guilty .  I am guilty, in the first instance, when, exposed to the other’s look, I experience my alienation and nudity as a state of degradation I am obliged to accept; that is the meaning of the well-known “and they knew that they were naked” in the Scriptures.  33 I am guilty, in addition, when I look in my turn at the Other, because, in the very act of affirming myself, I constitute her as an object and an instrument, and confer upon her this alienation that she will have to accept.  In this way, the original sin is my arising within a world where there is an other and, no matter what my subsequent relations with the other are, they can only be variations on the original theme of my guilt.  But this guilt is accompanied by powerlessness—although this powerlessness fails to absolve me of my guilt.  As we have seen, no matter what I do for the other’s freedom, my efforts amount to treating the other as an instrument and positing her freedom as a transcended-transcendence: but, on the other hand, no matter how much power I may have at my disposal to coerce the Other, I will only ever reach her in her object-being.  I can only ever provide her freedom with opportunities to show itself, without ever managing to increase or to decrease it, to direct it or to take hold of it.  Thus I am guilty in relation to the Other in my very being, because as my being arises it endows her, in spite of herself, with a new dimension of being, and yet I lack the power either to take advantage of my misdeed or to make amends for it.  It may happen that the for-itself, having experienced these various avatars in the course of its historialization, decides—in full knowledge of the futility of his previous attempts—to pursue the other’s death.  This free determination is known as “hatred.” A fundamental act of resignation is implicit within it: the for-itself abandons his ambition to actualize his union with the other; he relinquishes any use of the other as an instrument to retrieve his being-in-itself.  He wants only to return to a freedom without any de facto limits, i.e., to get rid of his elusive being-an-object-for-the-other and to abolish its dimension of alienation.  That is equivalent to the project of actualizing a world in which the other does not exist.  A for-itself who hates accepts that he is nothing more than a for-itself; taught by his various experiences that it is impossible to make use of his being-for-the-Other, he prefers instead to be only a free nihilation of his being, a detotalized totality, a pursuit whose own ends are set by himself.  The project of the person who hates is not to be an object at all—and hatred presents itself as an absolute positing of the for-itself’s freedom in the face of the other.  That is why, in the first place, hatred does not degrade the hated object.  In fact, it places the debate on its true ground: what I hate in the other is not this appearance, or that shortcoming, or this particular act.  It is her existence in general, as a transcended-transcendence.  That is why hatred implies a recognition of the other’s freedom.  Only this recognition is abstract and negative: hatred knows only the other-object, and attaches itself to this object.  This is the object it wants to destroy, in order to eliminate at the same time the transcendence which haunts it.  The for-itself who hates only glimpses this transcendence, as an inaccessible “beyond,” as the constant possibility of his alienation.  The Other’s transcendence is not, therefore, ever apprehended in its own right ; moreover, it could not be, without becoming an object.  I experience it, rather, as a constantly escaping characteristic of the Other-object, as an aspect of her most accessible empirical qualities that is “not supplied” or “still owing,” as a kind of constant monition which advises me that “the real question lies elsewhere.” That is why hatred goes through the revealed psyche; one does not hate the psyche itself.  It is also the reason why it makes no difference whether we hate the other’s transcendence through what we empirically refer to as her “vices” or her “virtues.” What I hate is the psychological-totality in its entirety, insofar as it directs me to the other’s transcendence: I do not stoop so low as to hate some particular objective detail.  That is what distinguishes “hating” from “detesting.” And hatred does not necessarily appear on account of some harm that I have just undergone.  On the contrary, it can arise just where we might have reason to expect gratitude, i.e., in the case of a good deed: what provokes hatred is merely an act of the Other through which I have been made to undergo her freedom.  This act is humiliating by itself: it is humiliating insofar as it concretely reveals my instrumental objecthood in the face of the Other’s freedom.  This revelation becomes immediately obfuscated, subsides into the past, and becomes opaque.  But it allows me to feel, precisely, that “something” is there for me to destroy in order to become free.  It is for this reason, moreover, that gratitude is so close to hatred: to be grateful for a good deed is to recognize that the other was entirely free in acting as she did.  No constraint, not even that of duty, determined her to do it.  She bears the entire responsibility for her action, and for the values presiding over its execution.  I myself was no more than a pretext, the material on which her action worked.  On the basis of this recognition, the for-itself can make his project either love or hate, as he pleases: he can no longer ignore the other.  A second consequence of these observations is that, in hating one person, I hate everyone else.  The goal that I wish symbolically to achieve, in pursuing the death of some other person, is the general principle of the Other’s existence.  The other whom I hate actually represents the others .  And my project to eliminate her is a project to eliminate the Other in general, i.e., to win back my for-itself’s non-substantial freedom.  Hatred includes an understanding of the fact that my dimension of being-alienated, which I acquire from others, really enslaves me.  It is the abolition of this slavery that becomes my project.  That is why hatred is a dark feeling, i.e., a feeling that aims to eliminate another and which, as a project, is knowingly projected in defiance of others’ disapproval.  The hatred that another person bears toward someone else worries me; I disapprove of it and try to prevent it because—even though it is not explicitly aimed at me—I know that it concerns me and is opposed to me.  And, indeed, it aims to destroy me, not because it seeks to eliminate me but by virtue of the fact that what it primarily demands is my disapproval—in order to override it.  Hatred demands to be hated, to the extent to which hating someone’s hatred amounts to an anxious recognition of the freedom of the person who hates.  But hatred, in its turn, is a failure.  Its initial project is, indeed, to abolish other consciousnesses.  But even if it were to succeed in that—if hatred were able, in other words, to abolish the other person in the present moment—it would not be able to make it the case that the other had not been.  Moreover, the other’s abolition, even if it is felt to be the triumph of hatred, implies an explicit recognition that the Other did exist .  From then on, my being-for-the-Other, in sliding into the past, becomes an irremediable dimension of myself.  It is what I have to be, in the form of having-been-it.  I cannot therefore get rid of it.  “Well,” I may be told, “at least you are escaping it in the present, and you will escape it in the future.” But no.  Someone who has, on one occasion, been for the Other remains contaminated in his being for the rest of his days, even were the Other to be entirely eliminated: he will continue to apprehend his dimension of being-for-the-Other as a permanent possibility of his being.  He will not be able to win back what he has lost; he has lost all hope, even, of acting upon this alienation and turning it to his profit, since the destroyed other has taken the key to this alienation with her into her grave.  That which I was for the other becomes frozen by the other’s death, and I will continue to be it, irremediably, in the past; I will also be it—and in the same way—in the present, if I persevere in the attitude, the projects and the way of life that the other has judged.  The other’s death constitutes me as an irremediable object, exactly as my own death does.  Thus hatred’s triumph, even as it arises, becomes transformed into failure.  Hatred does not enable us to get out of the circle.  It merely represents the final attempt, the attempt of despair.  After the failure of this attempt, the for-itself can only reenter the circle and submit to being endlessly tossed between one and the other of the two fundamental attitudes.  34 III.  “BEING-WITH” ( MITSEIN ) 35 AND THE “WE” It will be brought to our attention, of course, that our description is incomplete because it makes no place for certain concrete experiences in which we find ourselves not in conflict with the Other but in community with him.  36 And it is true that we often say “ we .” The very existence and the use of this grammatical category necessarily direct us to a real experience of Mitsein .  “We” can be a subject and, in this form, it can be assimilated to the plural of “I.” And of course the parallelism between grammar and thought is, in many cases, dubious: perhaps we are even required to revise this question entirely, and to study the relation between language and thought in a completely new form.  Still, it remains true that it seems impossible to conceive of a “we” subject without it referring at least to the idea of a plurality of subjects, simultaneously apprehending each other as subjectivities, i.e., as transcending-transcendences and not as transcended-transcendences.  If it is to be more than a mere flatus vocis , 37 the word “we” must denote a concept that subsumes an infinite variety of possible experiences.  And these experiences appear a priori to contradict the experience of my object-being for the Other, or the experience of the Other’s object-being for me.  In the “we” subject, nobody is an object.  The we encompasses a plurality of subjectivities, each of whom recognizes the others as subjectivities.  However, this recognition is not the object of any explicit thesis: what is explicitly posited is a common action, or the object of a common perception.  “We” resist; “we” mount an attack; “we” sentence the culprit; “we” watch such and such a performance.  In this way, our recognition of subjectivities is analogous to non-thetic consciousness’s recognition of itself: or, better still, it must be laterally performed, by a non-thetic consciousness whose explicit object is such and such a performance in the world.  The we is best illustrated for us by the spectator of a theatrical performance, whose consciousness expends itself in grasping the imaginary spectacle, in making use of its patterns to predict what will happen next, in positing imaginary beings like the hero, the traitor, the prisoner, etc.—and yet which, in that very movement in which it arises as a consciousness of the show, constitutes itself non-thetically as a consciousness (of) being a co-spectator of the show.  Indeed, all of us know that unconfessed unease that grips us in a half-empty auditorium or—on the contrary—the enthusiasm that is unleashed and strengthened when the auditorium is full and enthusiastic.  It is clear, moreover, that the experience of the we-subject can manifest itself in any circumstance whatsoever.  I am sitting outside a café: I observe the other customers and I know that I am observed.  This remains a wholly banal instance of conflict with the Other (the other’s object-being for me, my object-being for the other).  But now, all at once, some incident in the street occurs: a minor collision, for example, between a delivery-tricycle and a taxi.  Immediately, in the very instant at which I become a spectator of the incident, I experience myself non-thetically as committed within a we .  The earlier rivalries and minor conflicts have disappeared, and it is precisely the consciousnesses of all the customers which provide the we with its substance: we watch the event; we take sides.  This is the “unanimism” that Romains set out to describe in La Vie Unanime or in Le Vin Blanc de La Villette .  38 Here we find ourselves back with Heidegger’s Mitsein .  Were we wasting our time, then, in criticizing it earlier? 39 Here we will point out only that we have not wished to cast doubt on the experience of the we .  We have limited our demonstration to showing that this experience cannot be the foundation of our consciousness of the Other.  Indeed, it is clear that it could not constitute an ontological structure of human-reality: we have proved that the existence of the for-itself in the midst of others is, in its origin, a metaphysical and contingent fact.  It is clear, furthermore, that the we is not an intersubjective consciousness, or a new type of being that extends beyond and encompasses its parts in a synthetic whole, like the sociological notion of the collective consciousness.  The we is experienced by a particular consciousness: it is not necessary for all the customers outside the café to be conscious of being we for me to feel myself to be committed with them within a we .  The following everyday dialogue is familiar: “We are very dissatisfied.” “Not at all, my dear: speak for yourself.” It follows that some ways of being conscious of the we are deviant—without this implying that such a consciousness is, as such, in any way abnormal.  If this is the case, then, for a consciousness to become conscious of being committed within a we , it must be necessary first for the other consciousnesses entering into this community to be given to it in some other way, i.e., as a transcending-transcendence or a transcended-transcendence.  The we is a certain kind of specific experience that is produced, in special cases, on the foundation of our being-for-the-Other in general.  Our being-for -the-Other precedes and founds our being-with -the-other.  In addition, any philosopher who wants to study the we must be cautious and must know what he is talking about.  In fact there is not only a we -subject: grammar teaches us that there is also a we-complement, i.e., a we-object.  Now, in accordance with everything we have said so far, it will be easily understood that the we in “We are looking at them” cannot be on the same ontological level as the we in “We are being looked at.” 40 We are not dealing here with subjectivities qua subjectivities.  In the sentence “They are looking at me ,” I want to indicate that I am experiencing myself as an object for the Other, as an alienated Me , as a transcended-transcendence.  If the sentence “We are being looked at” is to refer to a real experience, it is necessary that in this experience I should feel myself to be committed with others in a community of transcended-transcendences of alienated “Mes.” Here the we refers us to an experience of being-objects in common .  Thus there are two radically different forms of the experience of the we , and the two forms correspond exactly to the looking-being and the being-looked-at which constitute the for-itself’s fundamental relations with the other.  It is these two forms of the we that we should examine now.  (A) The “we”-object We will begin by examining the second of these experiences: it happens to be easier to grasp its meaning, and we may be able to make use of it as a route through which to study the other.  We should note in the first place that the we-object throws us into the world; we experience it through shame, as a communal alienation.  This is illustrated by that significant episode in which the galley slaves are choked by anger and shame because a beautiful woman dressed in finery comes to visit their ship and sees their rags, their labor, and their wretchedness.  This is clearly a case of collective shame and collective alienation.  How then is it possible to experience oneself as an object alongside others, collectively? In order to find out, we must return to the fundamental characteristics of our being-for-the-Other.  So far we have considered the simple case in which I, alone, am facing the other—who is also alone.  In this case, I look at him or he looks at me, I try to transcend his transcendence or I experience mine as transcended, and I feel my possibilities as dead-possibilities.  We form a couple and we are each in situation in relation to the other.  But this situation exists objectively only for one or the other of us.  In effect, there is no reverse side to our reciprocal relation.  Only our description has not taken account of the fact that my relation with the other appears against the infinite ground of my relation and his relation to everyone else , i.e., to the quasi-totality of consciousnesses.  From this fact alone it follows that my relation with this other (which I experienced just now as the foundation of my being-for-the-Other), or the other’s relation with me, can at any moment—depending on the intervening reasons—be experienced as objects for others.  This can clearly be seen in the case where some third person appears.  Let us suppose, for example, that the other is looking at me.  At that moment, I experience myself as wholly alienated , and I accept myself as such.  Along comes the third person.  If he looks at me, I experience Them collectively, through my alienation, as “Them” (them-subjects).  41 This “them,” as we know, tends toward the “ they .” 42 It makes no difference to the fact that I am looked at; it does not reinforce—or hardly—my original alienation.  But if the third person looks at the other who is looking at me, the problem becomes more complex.  I may in fact be able to apprehend the third person, not directly but in relation to the other, who becomes an other who is looked at (by the third person).  In this way the third transcendence transcends the transcendence which is transcending me, and thereby helps to disarm it.  A metastable state is established here, which will soon decompose, either because I ally myself to the third person, in order to look at the other, who is transformed at that point into our object (and here I have an experience of the we-subject to be discussed later), or because I look at the third person and, in so doing, I transcend this third transcendence which is transcending the other.  In this case the third person becomes an object in my universe, and his possibilities are dead-possibilities; he cannot free me from the other.  Yet he is looking at the other who is looking at me.  We can regard the resultant situation as indeterminate and inconclusive, since I am an object for the other, who is an object for the third person, who is an object for me.  Only freedom, by leaning on one or other of these relationships, is able to give this situation a structure.  But it may also happen that the third person looks at the other whom I am looking at .  In this case, I may look at both of them and, in this way, disarm the third person’s gaze.  The third person and the other will then appear to me as Them-objects.  I may also apprehend that the third person is looking at the other, insofar as—without seeing the third person—I can pick up from the other’s behavior that he knows that he is looked at.  In this case I experience from the other and in relation to the other the third person’s transcending-transcendence.  I experience it as a radical and absolute alienation of the other.  He escapes from my world, and no longer belongs to me; he is an object for another transcendence.  He does not therefore lose the character of an object but he becomes ambiguous: he does not escape me through his own transcendence but through the third person’s transcendence.  Now, whatever I may be able to apprehend on him and of him, he is always other ; he is as many times other as there are others to perceive him and to think of him.  In order to reappropriate the other, I must look at the third person and confer objecthood upon him.  But, on the one hand, that is not always possible; and, on the other hand, the third person may himself be looked at by other third parties—which means he may be indefinitely other to the way I see him.  The result is a basic inconsistency in the other-object, and an infinite journey for the for-itself who tries to reappropriate this objecthood.  That is the reason, as we have seen, why lovers isolate themselves.  I can experience myself as looked at by the third person while I am looking at the other.  In this case I experience my alienation non-positionally at the very same time as I posit the other’s alienation.  I experience my possibilities for making use of the other as an instrument as dead-possibilities, and my transcendence—which is on the point of transcending the other toward my own ends—falls back into a transcended-transcendence.  I let go.  The other does not thereby become a subject, but I no longer feel that I myself am characterized as an object.  The other becomes something neutral that is purely and simply there, and with which I do nothing.  This will be the case, for example, if I am surprised in the act of beating and humiliating someone weak.  The appearance of the third person “detaches” me: the weakling is no longer “to be beaten” or “to be humiliated”; now he is nothing but pure existence, no longer anything, not even “a weakling”—or, if he does become one again, it will be through the third person’s intervention.  I will learn from the third person that this man was a weakling (“You have no shame; you attack a weakling,” etc.): the quality of being weak will be bestowed on him in my eyes by the third person; it will no longer form part of my world but of a universe where I exist, along with the weakling, for the third person.  This brings us finally to the case that concerns us: I am engaged in a conflict with the other.  The third person comes along and looks at us, encompassing both of us within his gaze.  Correlatively, I experience my alienation and my objecthood.  I am out there, for the Other, as an object in the midst of a world that is not “mine.” But the other, whom I was looking at or who was looking at me, undergoes the same modification, and I encounter this modification of the other simultaneously with the one that I experience.  The other is an object in the midst of the third person’s world.  Moreover, this objecthood is not a mere modification of his being, in parallel to the one I undergo; rather, the two objecthoods impinge on me and on the other within a global modification of the situation I am in, and in which the other finds himself.  Before the third person looked at us, there was a situation circumscribed by the other’s possibilities, and in which my status was that of an instrument—and an inverse situation, circumscribed by my own possibilities, which included the other.  Each of these situations was the death of the other, and we could only grasp either one of them by objectifying the other.  With the appearance of the third person I feel, all at once, that my possibilities are alienated and, in the same moment, I discover that the other’s possibilities are dead-possibilities.  Nonetheless, the situation does not disappear, but it flees from my world and from the other’s world, and becomes constituted as an objective form in the midst of a third world.  In this third world, the situation is seen, judged, transcended, and used, but suddenly a leveling of the two opposite situations occurs, and there is no longer any structure of priority which places me ahead of the other or, inversely, him ahead of me, since for the third person our possibilities are, equally, dead-possibilities.  Therefore, I suddenly experience the existence, in the third person’s world, of an objective situation-form in which we—the other and myself—figure as equivalent and joint structures.  Within this objective situation, conflict does not arise from the free arising of our transcendences; rather, it is registered and transcended by the third person as a de facto given, which defines us and detains us, each with the other.  Far from it being the case that the other’s possibility of hitting me and my possibility of defending myself exclude each other, each of these—for the third person—complements, involves, and implies the other as dead-possibilities—and that is precisely what I experience, in a non-thetic form, and without any knowledge of it.  Thus, what I experience is a being-outside in which I am organized with the other within an indissoluble and objective whole, a whole in which I am no longer distinguished from the other but to whose constitution I contribute, jointly, with the other.  And to the extent that I accept, as a matter of principle, my being-outside for the third person, I must in the same way accept the other’s being-outside; what I accept is the commonality of equivalence through which I exist as committed within a form to whose constitution I, like the other, contribute.  In brief, I accept myself as committed outside in the other and I accept the other as committed outside in me.  And the experience of the we -object is this fundamental acceptance of this commitment—which, without apprehending it, I carry before me—and this free recognition of my responsibility as including the other’s responsibility.  Thus the we-object is never known , in the sense in which, for example, knowledge of our Self may be delivered by reflection; it is never felt , in the sense in which a feeling can disclose a concrete object to us, such as something disagreeable, hateful, disturbing, etc.  Nor is it merely experienced , for what is experienced is the pure situation of solidarity with the other.  The we-object is revealed only through my acceptance of this situation, i.e., through the necessity of my having, within my free accepting, to accept the other as well , because of the situation’s internal reciprocity.  Thus, in the absence of the third person, I am able to say “I am fighting the other.” But as soon as he appears, with the leveling of the other’s possibilities and my own into dead-possibilities, the relationship becomes reciprocal and I am obliged to feel that “we are fighting each other.” Indeed, the phrase “I am fighting him and he is fighting me” would clearly be inadequate: in fact I am fighting him because he is fighting me, and reciprocally: the project of fighting germinated in his mind as it did in mine and, for the third person, it is united in a single project , common to this them-object which he encompasses within his gaze and which even constitutes the unifying synthesis of this “them.” I must therefore accept myself as I am apprehended by the third person, as an integral part of the “them.” And this “them,” which is accepted by a subjectivity as his meaning-for-the-Other, becomes the we .  This we cannot be captured by reflective consciousness.  On the contrary, the appearance of reflection coincides with the collapse of the we ; the for-itself disengages and posits its ipseity against the others .  Indeed, we need to understand that from the outset the for-itself feels its belonging to the we-object as an even more radical alienation, since he is no longer obliged merely to take up what he is for the Other but, in addition, a totality that he is not—even though he forms an integral part of it.  In this sense, the we is a sudden experience of the human condition as being committed among others, insofar as that is an objectively registered fact .  The we-object—although it is experienced in the context of a particular solidarity, and is centered on this solidarity (I will feel shame precisely because we were surprised while we were fighting)—has a meaning that extends beyond the specific circumstance in which it is experienced, which seeks to subsume my belonging as an object within the human totality (minus the third person’s pure consciousness) that is grasped, equally, as an object.  It corresponds therefore to an experience of humiliation and powerlessness: the person who feels himself to be constituting a we with other men feels stuck within an infinity of foreign existences; he is radically alienated, and helpless.  Some situations seem more suited than others to trigger the experience of the we .  Common work is a case in point: when several people experience themselves as apprehended by a third person while they jointly work on the same object, the very meaning of the manufactured object refers us to the laboring collectivity, in the form of a we .  The movement that I make—which the item to be assembled demands—has meaning only if it is preceded by such and such a movement by my neighbor, and followed by some other movement, made by some other worker.  From this a more easily accessible form of “we” ensues, since it is the demand of the object itself and its potentialities—as well as its coefficient of adversity—which point toward the workers’ we-object.  We experience ourselves, then, as apprehended in the capacity of a “we” through a material object “to be created.” The materiality sets its seal on the solidarity of our community and we appear to ourselves as an instrumental and technical arrangement of means, each of which has its place assigned by an end.  But if, empirically, some situations appear in this way to favor the arising of a we , we should not lose sight of the fact that any human situation, insofar as it commits us in the midst of others, is experienced as a we the moment a third person appears.  I am walking in the street, following some man whom I only see from behind; I have the minimum technical and practical relatedness to him that is conceivable.  However, it only needs a third person to look at me, to look at the road, or to look at him to make it the case that I am bound to him through the solidarity of the we : we are striding down the rue Blomet, 43 one behind the other, on a morning in July.  There is always a point of view from which someone looking at various for-itselfs is able to unite them within a we .  Conversely, just as the look only manifests in material terms the original fact of my existence for the other, and just as I can, therefore, experience myself as existing for the other in the absence of any particular episode of being looked at, it is not necessary, either, for any particular act of looking to freeze and to penetrate us in order for us to be able to experience ourselves outside, and as integrated within a we .  All it takes is the existence of the detotalized-totality “humanity” for any particular group of individuals to be able to feel itself as a we in relation to all, or some part of, other men, whether these men are present “in flesh and blood” or whether they are real but absent .  In this way I can always grasp myself—in the presence or absence of a third person—as a pure ipseity, or as integrated in a we .  This leads us to various special cases of the “we” and, in particular, to the so-called class consciousness.  Class consciousness is, obviously, an acceptance of a particular we in the context of a collective situation that is more clearly structured than usual.  It is not important to define this situation here; our concern is only with the nature of the we that is taken up.  If a society, by virtue of its economic or political structure, is divided into the oppressed classes and the oppressor classes, the situation of the oppressor classes provides the oppressed classes with the image of an ever-present third person, scrutinizing them and transcending them through his freedom.  It is not their hard work, the low standard of living, or the sufferings that they endure which constitute the oppressed community into a class; in fact their common work could—as we will see in the next section—constitute the laboring community into a “we-subject,” insofar as it experiences itself—regardless of the coefficient of adversity of things —as transcending objects within the world toward its own end.  The standard of living is something entirely relative, and will be assessed in different ways according to circumstances (it might be undergone , or accepted , or demanded in the name of a shared ideal); the sufferings endured, considered in themselves, tend rather to isolate the suffering people than to unite them; in general they are sources of conflict.  In any case, the mere comparison that the members of the oppressed community are able to make between the harshness of their condition and the privileges enjoyed by the oppressor classes is never sufficient to constitute a class consciousness; at the most it will arouse individual jealousies or specific feelings of despair; it is not possible for it to unify the people and cause each person to accept that unification.  But, insofar as it constitutes the condition of the oppressed class, this set of characteristics is neither simply undergone nor simply accepted.  It would be equally mistaken, however, to say that it is grasped from the outset by the oppressed class as something imposed by the oppressor class; on the contrary, it takes a long time to construct and to spread a theory of oppression.  And the value of that theory would only be explanatory .  The fundamental fact is that a member of the oppressed community—who is, merely as a person, engaged in fundamental conflicts with other members of this community (love, hate, competing interests, etc.)—must grasp his condition, and that of the other members of this community, as one in which he is looked at and thought about by other consciousnesses that escape him.  The “master,” the “feudal lord,” the “bourgeois,” and the “capitalist” do not appear merely as powerful people who give orders but further, and above all else, as third persons, i.e., as those who are outside the oppressed community and for whom this community exists.  It is therefore for them and in their freedom that the reality of the oppressed class comes to exist.  They bring it into being by looking at it.  It is to them, and through them, that the identity between my condition and that of the other oppressed people is revealed; it is for them that I exist within an organized situation with others, and that my possibles as dead-possibilities are strictly equivalent to others’ possibles; it is for them that I am one worker, and it is through and within their revelation as a looking-Other that I experience myself as one among others.  In consequence, I encounter the we in which I am integrated—or “the class”— outside , in the third person’s gaze, and it is this collective alienation that I accept, in saying “we.” From this standpoint, the impact of the third person’s privileges and “our” burdens, of “our” poverty, is in the first instance only that of their meaning ; they signify the third person’s independence in relation to us; they present our alienation to us more clearly.  As they are not, for all that, any the less endured and as, in particular, our labor and our fatigue are no less suffered , it is through my subjection to this suffering that I experience my being-looked-at-as-a-thing-committed-within-a-totality-of-things.  It is on the basis of my suffering, of my poverty, that I am grasped by the third person, collectively with others—i.e., on the basis of the world’s adversity, on the basis of the facticity of my condition.  Without the third person, however great the world’s adversity, I would grasp myself as a triumphant transcendence; with the third person’s appearance, I experience us as we are grasped in terms of things, and as things that the world has defeated.  Thus the oppressed class finds its unity as a class in the knowledge that the oppressor class gains of it, and the arrival of class consciousness in an oppressed person corresponds to his accepting, in shame, a we-object.  We will see in the next section what “class consciousness” might involve for a member of the oppressor class.  The important point here, in any case—as the example we have just chosen adequately demonstrates—is that the experience of the we-object presupposes that of being-for-the-Other, of which it is only a more complex modality.  It belongs therefore, as a particular case, within the framework of our previous descriptions so far.  Moreover, it contains within it a potentiality for disintegration, since it is experienced through shame and since the we collapses the moment the for-itself, faced with the third person, lays claim to his ipseity and looks, in turn, at him.  This individual assertion of ipseity is moreover only one of the possible ways of eliminating the we-object.  In some highly structured situations—such as, for example, class consciousness—the project revealed by the acceptance of the we is no longer that of escaping the we through an individual reclamation of ipseity but of liberating the we in its entirety from objecthood by transforming it into a we-subject.  44 This is basically a variation of the project we have already described, of transforming the person who is looking into someone who is looked at; it is the everyday transition from one of these two major fundamental attitudes of our for-the-Other to the other.  Indeed, the oppressed class can only affirm itself as a we-subject in relation to the oppressor class, and at its expense—i.e., by transforming it into “them-objects” in its turn.  Only the particular person , who is objectively committed within the class, aims to bring the class in its entirety with him, in and through his project to turn things round.  In this sense, the experience of the we-object invokes that of the we-subject, as the experience of my being-an-object-for-the-other invokes my experience of the Other’s-object-being-for-me.  Similarly, in so-called crowd psychology, we encounter collective infatuations ( Boulangisme , etc.) 45 that are a specific form of love: in this case the person saying “we” recovers—in the midst of the crowd—love’s original project, but it is no longer on his own account: he demands the third person to save the entire community in its very objecthood, by sacrificing his freedom to it.  Here, as before, disappointed love leads to masochism.  We can see this in the case in which the community throws itself into a state of servitude, and demands to be treated as an object.  In that case too, the crowd contains a multiplicity of individual men’s projects: the crowd has been constituted as a crowd by the leader or the speaker who looks at it; its unity is an object-unity that each of its members can read in the gaze of the third person dominating it, and thus each person forms the project of losing himself within this objecthood, of giving up his ipseity entirely, in order to be nothing more than an instrument in the leader’s hands.  But this instrument, into which he wishes to merge, is no longer purely and simply his personal for-the-Other; it is the crowd-as-objective-totality.  The crowd’s monstrous materiality and its innermost reality (even though these are only experienced) are fascinating for each of its members; each person demands to be drowned within the crowd-instrument through its leader’s look.  46 Throughout these various cases we have seen the we-object constituting itself on the basis of a concrete situation in which one part of the detotalized-totality of “humanity” is immersed to the exclusion of the other.  We are only we in the eyes of the others, and it is on the basis of our being looked at by others that we can affirm ourselves as we .  But this implies that an abstract and unrealizable project of the for-itself might exist, aiming at an absolute totalization of himself and all others.  This attempt to recuperate the human totality cannot take place without the existence of a third party—distinct, by definition, from humanity—in whose eyes humanity is in its entirety an object.  This third person is unrealizable and is merely the object of the limiting concept of alterity.  He occupies the position of “third person” in relation to all possible groupings and is unable, in any case, to enter into community with any particular human grouping; he is a third person in relation to whom nobody else can be constituted as a third person.  This concept is none other than that of the looking-being who can never be looked at, i.e., the idea of God.  But, as God is characterized as a radical absence, the attempt to realize a humanity that is ours is endlessly renewed and leads endlessly to failure.  In this way, the humanist “we”—as a we-object—suggests itself to each individual consciousness as an ideal that is impossible to achieve, even while each person retains the illusion of being able to reach it by progressively expanding the circle of communities to which he belongs: this humanist “we” remains an empty concept, the mere sign of a possible extension of “we” in its everyday usage.  Whenever we use the term we in this sense (to refer to a suffering humanity, a transgressing humanity, or to establish an objective meaning of History, by envisaging man as an object developing his potential), we are confined to pointing toward a certain particular experience to be undergone in the presence of the absolute third person, i.e., God.  In this way the limiting concept of humanity (as the totality of the we-object) and the limiting concept of God each imply and are correlative to the other.  (B) The we-subject It is the world that acquaints us with our belonging to a subject-community, and especially the existence in the world of manufactured objects.  These objects have been worked on by men for them-subjects, i.e., for a transcendence that is not individualized or numbered, and which coincides with the undifferentiated gaze that we referred to earlier as the “they,” because the worker—whether or not he is enslaved—works in the presence of an undifferentiated and absent transcendence, whose free possibilities the worker confines himself to sketching out—in their absence—in the object he works on.  In this sense the worker, whoever he is, experiences in his work his instrument-being for the other; work, unless it is strictly in the service of the worker’s own ends, is a mode of alienation.  Here the alienating transcendence is the consumer, which is to say the “they,” whose projects the worker can only anticipate.  When therefore I use a manufactured object I encounter within it a sketch of my own transcendence; it tells me which action I should perform, that I must turn, or push, or pull, or press.  Moreover a hypothetical imperative is involved, which directs me to an end that belongs equally to the world: if I wish to sit down, if I wish to open the tin, etc.  And this end has itself been anticipated in the object’s constitution as an end posited by some arbitrary transcendence.  47 It belongs now to the object as its most fitting potentiality.  In this way it is true that a manufactured object introduces me to myself in the form of “they,” i.e., it reflects back to me the image of my transcendence as that of “some or other” arbitrary transcendence.  And if I allow my possibilities to be channeled by the implement constituted in this way, I experience myself as any arbitrary transcendence: if someone travels from the metro stop “Trocadéro” to “Sèvres-Babylone,” “they” change at “La Motte-Picquet.” This change is foreseen, indicated on the maps, etc.; if I change line at La Motte-Picquet, I am the “they” who changes there.  Of course, I am differentiated from each metro user, as much by the individual arising of my being as by the remote ends I am pursuing.  But these latter ends are only at the horizon of my action.  My immediate ends are “their” ends, and I apprehend myself as being interchangeable with any of my neighbors.  In this sense we lose our real individuality, because the project that we are is precisely the project that others are.  In this metro corridor there is only a single, identical project, inscribed into its matter a long time ago, into which a living and undifferentiated transcendence flows.  To the extent that I am actualized, when I am alone, as any arbitrary transcendence, I only experience a being-undifferentiated (if, alone in my bedroom, I open a tin with the right tin-opener).  But if this undifferentiated transcendence plans whatever projects it has alongside other transcendences, experienced as real presences, similarly absorbed in projects which are identical to my projects, in that case I actualize my project as one among a thousand identical projects, planned by the same undifferentiated transcendence, and my experience is of a common transcendence aiming at a single goal, of which I am only an ephemeral particular instance; I insert myself within the great human current that, unremittingly, and ever since the metro has existed, streams through the corridors of “La Motte-Picquet-Grenelle” station.  48 But we must note: (1) This experience is psychological in kind, and not ontological.  It in no way corresponds to a real unification of the for-itselfs in question.  Nor is it based in any immediate acquaintance with their transcendence as such (as in the case of being-looked-at); what motivates it, instead, is the objectifying twofold apprehension of the object which is transcended in common, and of the bodies which surround my own.  In particular, the fact that I am committed with others in a shared rhythm that I contribute to bringing into being is an element that is especially conducive to my perceiving myself as committed within a we-subject.  That is the meaning of the soldiers’ march, and it is also the meaning of the rhythmical work that is done in teams.  We must note that in this case, in fact, the rhythm issues freely from me; it is a project which I accomplish through my transcendence; it synthesizes a future with a present and a past, within a perspective of regular repetition; this rhythm is produced by me.  But at the same time it blends into the general rhythm of work or of marching done by the concrete community that surrounds me; it only acquires its meaning through it—as I may appreciate, for example, when the rhythm I adopt is “not in time.” However, the inclusion of my rhythm within the others’ rhythm is apprehended “laterally”; I do not use the collective rhythm as an instrument, nor do I contemplate it in the sense in which I might contemplate, for example, some dancers on a stage; it surrounds me and carries me along without being an object for me; I do not transcend it toward my own possibilities but I run my transcendence into its transcendence and my own aim—to perform this work, to arrive at this place—is an end which belongs to a “they,” and which cannot be distinguished from the group’s own collective goal.  Thus the rhythm that I generate comes into being jointly with me and laterally, as a collective rhythm; it is my rhythm to the extent that it is their rhythm, and vice versa .  That is precisely the basis of the experience of the we-subject: in the end, it is our rhythm .  But, as we can see, that can happen only if, by antecedently accepting a shared end and shared instruments, I constitute myself as an undifferentiated transcendence by discarding any personal ends that go beyond the shared ends that are currently being pursued.  Thus, while it is a condition of the very experience of undergoing my being-for-the-Other that a real and concrete dimension of being should arise, the experience of the we-subject is purely a psychological and subjective event in a particular consciousness which corresponds to an internal modification of the structure of this consciousness but which does not appear on the foundation of a concrete ontological relation with others and does not actualize any “ Mitsein .” It is just one way of being aware of myself in the midst of others.  And of course this experience may be sought out as the symbol of an absolute and metaphysical unity of all transcendences; indeed, it seems to eliminate the original conflict between transcendences by making them converge upon the world.  In this sense, the ideal we-subject will be the we of a humanity that has made itself mistress of the earth.  But the experience of the we belongs in the domain of individual psychology and remains a mere symbol of the desirable unity of transcendences; in fact it is in no way a lateral and real apprehension, by a particular subjectivity, of subjectivities as such; the subjectivities remain out of reach and radically separated.  But it is things and bodies, it is the ways my transcendence is materially channeled, that lead me to apprehend it as being extended and supported by other transcendences, without it being the case either that I come out of my self or that others come out of theirs; I learn through the world that I am part of a we .  That is why my experience of the we-subject does not remotely imply a similar and correlative experience in others; that is also why it is so unstable, because it requires specific arrangements in the midst of the world and disappears along with those arrangements.  In truth, a multiplicity of structures within the world designate me as everyman ; first, there are all the implements, ranging from “tools” in the strict sense to buildings with their lifts, their water or gas pipes, and their electricity, and taking in along the way the modes of transport, the shops, etc.  Each shopfront, each window, reflects back my image as an undifferentiated transcendence.  Furthermore, my professional and technical relations with others also announce me as everyman: for the café waiter I am the customer; for the ticket inspector I am the user of the metro.  Finally, the incident in the street that suddenly occurs in front of the café terrace where I am seated designates me, again, as an anonymous spectator and as a pure “gaze which makes this incident exist from the outside.” 49 The play whose performance I attend at the theater and the exhibition of paintings that I visit equally designate the spectator’s anonymity.  And, of course, I turn myself into everyman when I try on some shoes or uncork a bottle, or enter a lift, or laugh at the theater.  But the experience of this undifferentiated transcendence is a contingent, inner event that concerns only me.  Certain specific circumstances supplied by the world may add to it the impression of being we .  But it cannot amount in any case to anything more than a purely subjective impression which commits nobody apart from me.  (2) The experience of the we-subject cannot be first, and it cannot constitute a primordial attitude toward others, since its fulfillment requires, on the contrary, a prior and twofold recognition of the Other’s existence.  In the first place, in point of fact, any manufactured object must—in order to qualify as such—invoke the producers who made it and the rules for using it which other people have determined.  Faced with an inanimate and uncrafted object, whose operation I myself determine, and to which I myself assign a new use (if, for example, I use a stone as a hammer), I have a non-thetic consciousness of my person , i.e., of my ipseity, of my own ends and my free inventiveness.  As a matter of their essential structure, the rules for use, the “instructions” for manufactured objects—which, in their simultaneous rigidity and ideality, resemble taboos —place me in the other’s presence; and it is because the other treats me as an undifferentiated transcendence that I am able to actualize myself as one.  It only takes, for example, those large signs placed above the doors of the station or waiting room, on which someone has written the words “exit” and “entrance”—or those pointing fingers on posters which designate a building or a direction.  Here, again, we are dealing with hypothetical imperatives.  But here the way the imperative is formulated allows the other who is speaking, and directly addressing me, to be clearly visible.  Clearly, the printed sentence is addressed to me , and represents an immediate communication from the other to me: I am targeted .  But if the other is aiming at me, he aims at me as an undifferentiated transcendence.  Accordingly, if in order to leave I make use of the way out designated as the “exit,” my use of it does not in any way draw on the absolute freedom of my personal projects: no tool is constituted by my invention , and I do not surpass the pure materiality of a thing toward my possibles.  Rather, a human transcendence, guiding my own transcendence, has already slipped in between the object and myself; the object is already humanized , and signifies “the human kingdom.” Considered merely as an opening on to the street, the “exit” is strictly equivalent to the entrance; neither its coefficient of adversity nor its visible utility mark it out as an exit.  I do not comply with the object itself when I use it as an “exit”; I adapt to the human order, recognizing the other’s existence through my act itself, and I establish a dialogue with the other.  Heidegger said all this, and he was right to say it.  But the conclusion which he forgets to draw is that, for an object to appear as manufactured, it is necessary for the other to already be given in some other way.  A person who had not already experienced the other could have no way of distinguishing a manufactured object from the pure materiality of an uncrafted thing.  Even were he to use it in accordance with the manufacturer’s directions, he would be reinventing this way of using it and thereby effecting a free appropriation of a natural thing.  To take the way out that is labeled “exit” without having read the sign or knowing the language is to be like the Stoic’s madman who says “It’s daytime” in the daytime, not as a result of an objective observation but in accordance with the inner workings of his madness.  If, then, a manufactured object makes reference to others and—through that—to my undifferentiated transcendence, it is because I am already acquainted with others.  Thus the experience of the we-subject is constructed on the original experience of the Other and can only be secondary and subordinate to it.  But in addition, as we have seen, to apprehend oneself as an undifferentiated transcendence—which is, in essence, as a pure instantiation of the “human species”—is not yet to grasp oneself as a structural part of a we-subject.  For that to happen, one must encounter oneself as everyman within an arbitrary human current.  It is necessary therefore to be surrounded by others.  We have also seen that, in this experience, the others are not felt in any way to be subjects, nor are they grasped as objects.  They are not posited at all .  Of course, my starting point is their de facto existence in the world, and my perception of their actions, but I do not apprehend their facticity or their movements positionally : I have a lateral and non-positional consciousness of their bodies as correlative to my body, of their actions as unfolding in conjunction with my actions, in such a way that I am unable to tell whether it is my actions that are generating their actions or their actions that are generating mine.  These few remarks suffice to make it clear that, in the experience of the we , the others who form part of the we cannot originally be given to me to be known as others.  On the contrary, for an experience of my relations with the Other to take the form of “ Mitsein ,” there must first be some knowledge of what the Other is.  On its own, without a prior recognition of what the other is, the Mitsein would be impossible .  I “am with…”: fine, but who are you with? In addition, even if this experience was ontologically primary, it is not possible to see, without a radical modification of this experience, how to make the transition from a completely undifferentiated transcendence to an experience of any particular people.  Furthermore, if the other was not given, the experience of the we , as it broke up, would only give rise to the apprehension of pure instrument-objects within the world delimited by my transcendence.  We do not claim that these few observations have exhausted the question of the we .  They aim only to point out that the experience of the we-subject is in no way a metaphysical revelation; it depends closely on various forms of being-for-the-Other and is no more than an empirical amplification of some of these.  That accounts, evidently, for the extreme instability of this experience.  It comes and goes erratically, and we are left either confronting some object-others or being looked at by an anonymous “they.” It does not appear as a definitive solution to the conflict but as a temporary cooling down, established in the conflict’s very midst.  It would be futile to wish for a human we in which the intersubjective totality could become conscious of itself as a unified subjectivity.  Such an ideal could only be a daydream, produced by taking to their limit—and making absolute—experiences that are fragmentary and strictly psychological.  Moreover, this ideal itself implies a recognition of the conflict of transcendences as the original state of being-for-the-Other.  This is the key to explaining an apparent paradox: as the unity of the oppressed class stems from its experiencing itself as a we-object in the face of the undifferentiated “they” of the third person or the oppressor class, it is tempting to think that, symmetrically, the oppressor class grasps itself as a we-subject facing the oppressed class.  But the oppressor class’s weakness is that, although it has at its disposal a precise and strict apparatus for coercion, it is in itself profoundly anarchic.  The “bourgeois” is not to be defined merely as some Homo economicus, possessed of power and particular privileges within a society of a certain kind: he can be described from the inside as a consciousness who does not recognize that he belongs to a class.  Indeed, his situation does not allow him to grasp himself as being committed, in common with the other members of the bourgeois class, within a we-object.  On the other hand, however, it follows from the very nature of the we-subject that his experiences of it will only be fleeting, and without metaphysical significance.  It is common for the “bourgeois” to deny that classes exist: he attributes the existence of a proletariat to the action of agitators, to unfortunate incidents, to injustices that could be remedied by minor adjustments; he asserts that the interests of capital and labor are held in common; against a solidarity based on class, he pits a wider solidarity, a national solidarity integrating worker and boss within a Mitsein that eliminates their conflict.  This is not a case, as it is all too often said to be, of a maneuver, nor is it an imbecilic refusal to see the situation in its true light.  But the member of the oppressor class can see before him the totality of the oppressed class, as an objective grouping of “they-subjects,” without correlatively actualizing his commonality of being with the other members of the oppressor class: the two experiences are in no way complementary.  In fact, one only needs to face an oppressed community on one’s own, in order to grasp it as an object-instrument, and to grasp oneself as the internal-negation of this community, i.e., merely as the impartial third party.  It is only when the oppressed class sets itself—by means of revolt or a sudden increase in its powers—to confront the oppressor class as a “they-are-looking,” only at that moment, that the oppressors will experience themselves as we .  But it will be in fear and shame, and as a we-object.  Thus the ordeal of the we-object and the experience of the we-subject are not at all symmetrical.  50 The first reveals a dimension of real existence and corresponds to the original ordeal of the for-the-Other, only enriched.  The other is a psychological experience actualized in a historical man, immersed in a worked universe and in a society of a particular economic type; it reveals nothing in particular, and it is a purely subjective “ Erlebnis .” It seems therefore that the experience of the we , although it is real, is not such as to change the results of our earlier investigations.  We are dealing in all cases with either a we-object or a we-subject.  The we-object depends directly on the third person , which is to say on my being-for-the-Other, and it is constituted on the foundation of my being-out-there-for-the-other.  The we-subject is a psychological experience which presupposes that the existence of the other as such has been revealed to us, in some way or other.  It is therefore futile for human-reality to try to escape this dilemma: one either transcends the other or allows oneself to be transcended by him.  The essence of relations between consciousnesses is not Mitsein ; it is conflict.  At the end of this long description of the for-itself’s relations with the other we have therefore acquired this certainty: the for-itself is not only a being which arises as the nihilation of the in-itself that it is, and the internal negation of the in-itself that it is not.  The moment the other appears, that nihilating flight is entirely seized back by the in-itself, and frozen into the in-itself.  On its own, the for-itself is transcendent in relation to the world; it is the nothing through which there are things.  The other, as he arises, confers on the for-itself a being-in-itself-in-the-midst-of-the-world as a thing among things.  This petrifaction of the in-itself 51 through the other’s look is the innermost meaning of the Medusa myth.  We have therefore advanced in our investigation: we wanted, in effect, to ascertain the for-itself’s original relation to the in-itself.  First we learned that the for-itself was a nihilation and a radical negation of the in-itself; now we are observing that it is also, and without contradiction, wholly in-itself, and present in the midst of the in-itself, in virtue solely of the other’s participation.  But this second aspect of the for-itself represents its outside : the for-itself is by its nature a being that cannot coincide with its being-in-itself.  These remarks might provide the basis for a general theory of being, which is the very goal we are pursuing.  However, it is still too early to make a start on it: the description of the for-itself as merely projecting its possibilities beyond being-in-itself will not in fact suffice.  The projection of these possibilities does not statically configure the world: in every moment the world is changed by it.  If, for example, we read Heidegger with this point in view, we will be struck by the deficiency of his hermeneutic descriptions.  Adapting his terminology, we might say that he describes Dasein as the existent who surpasses existents toward their being.  And here “being” signifies the existent’s meaning, or its way of being.  And it is true that the for-itself is the being through whom existents reveal their way of being.  But Heidegger says nothing about the fact that the for-itself is not only the being who constitutes an ontology of existents but, in addition, the being through whom ontic modifications arise within existents, in their capacity as existents.  Obviously, we should consider this permanent possibility of acting —i.e., of modifying the in-itself in its ontic materiality, in its “flesh”—as an essential characteristic of the for-itself; as such, its foundation needs to be located in an original relation between the for-itself and the in-itself that we have not yet elucidated.  What is it to act ? Why does the for-itself act? How can it act? These are the questions that we must answer now.  We have all the elements for an answer: nihilation, facticity and the body, being-for-the-Other, and the distinctive nature of the in-itself.  We must examine them anew.  Part Four: To Have, To Do, and To Be Part Four GT475 To have, to do, and to be 1 Having, doing, and being are the fundamental categories of human reality.  Every type of human behavior can be subsumed within them.  Knowing , for example, is a mode of having .  These categories are not unconnected, and several writers have emphasized these relationships.  Denis de Rougemont brings a relation of this type to light when he writes, in his article about Don Juan, “He was not enough to have .” 2 And, again, we point to a similar connection when we show a moral agent doing ( faire ) something in order to make ( faire ) himself, and making himself in order to be.  However, since the anti-substantialist tendency has won out in modern philosophy, most thinkers have tried, in the domain of human behavior, to imitate those of their predecessors who replaced substance in physics by mere movement.  For a long time, morality aimed to provide man with a means of being .  That was the meaning of Stoic morality or of Spinoza’s Ethics .  But if man’s being is to become absorbed into the succession of his actions, the aim of morality will no longer be to raise man to a higher ontological dignity.  In this sense, Kantian morality is the first great ethical system to substitute doing for being as action’s supreme value.  The heroes of L’Espoir occupy for the most part the territory of doing , and Malraux shows us the conflict between the old Spanish democrats, who are still attempting to be, and the communists, whose morality resolves into a series of precise and circumstantial obligations, in which each of which targets a particular doing .  3 Who is right? Is the supreme value of human action to do or to be ? And, whichever solution we adopt, what becomes of having ? Ontology ought to be able to advise us in relation to this problem; it is moreover one of its essential tasks, if the for-itself is the being that defines itself through action .  We should not therefore finish this work without sketching out, in broad outline, an examination of action in general and the essential relations between doing , being, and having .  1 TN: Avoir , faire, and être are often grouped together linguistically as the three most important French verbs, all of them irregular.  Faire can mean both “to make” and “to do,” and, as Sartre uses the verb in both senses, this can create difficulty for translation.  In the present chapter, where Sartre is discussing action, “to do” works well; later, when he is talking about our desire to produce things, “to make” is clearly better.  My policy will be that, for the most part, I will use “to do” or “to make, or to do”; where neither of these works, I will use “to make.” Sometimes I remind the reader that it is the same French verb by putting faire in brackets within the sentence where it occurs.  2 TN: Denis de Rougemont (1906–1985) was a Swiss cultural theorist who wrote in French and moved to Paris in 1930.  Sartre may have read Rougemont’s best-known work on its publication in 1939.  It is available in translation as Rougemont (1983).  3 TN: Sartre has already referred to this novel, based on Malraux’s experiences of the Spanish Civil War, at EN 147 and EN 150.  Introduction: In Search of Being INTRODUCTION GT9 In search of being 1 I.  THE IDEA OF THE PHENOMENON By reducing the existent to the series of appearances that manifest it, modern thought has made considerable progress.  The aim was to eliminate a number of troublesome dualisms from philosophy, and to replace them with the monism of the phenomenon.  Has it succeeded? In the first place, we have certainly got rid of the dualism that opposes an existent’s inside to its outside.  The existent no longer has an “outside,” if by that we mean some skin at its surface that conceals the object’s true nature from view.  And if this “true nature” is, in turn, to be the thing’s secret reality—something that we can anticipate or assume but that we can never reach, because it is “inside” the object in question—that does not exist either.  The appearances that manifest the existent are neither internal nor external: they are all of equal worth, each of them refers to other appearances, and none of them has priority.  Force, for example, is not a metaphysical conatus of some unknown kind, concealed behind its effects (accelerations, deviations, etc.); it is the sum of these effects.  Similarly, an electric current has no secret other side: it is nothing but the collection of physicochemical actions (electrolytic processes, the incandescence of a carbon filament, the movement of the galvanometer’s needle, etc.) that manifest it.  None of these actions is sufficient to reveal it.  But it does not point to anything behind it; each action points to itself and to the total series.  From this it obviously follows that the dualism of being and appearing no longer has a legitimate place in philosophy.  An appearance refers to the total series of appearances, not to some hidden reality that siphons off all the existent’s being for itself.  And the appearance, for its part, is not an unstable manifestation of that being.  For as long as we were still able to believe in noumenal realities, the appearance was presented as purely negative, as “that which is not being”: it had no being other than that of illusion and error.  But that being was itself borrowed, it was itself a sham, and the biggest problem facing us was how to maintain the appearance with enough cohesion and existence to stop it from being reabsorbed into non-phenomenal being.  But once we have freed ourselves from what Nietzsche called “the illusion of backworlds” 2 —and if we no longer believe in any being-behind-appearance—the appearance becomes, on the contrary, full positivity.  Its essence is an “appearing” that is no longer opposed to being but which is, on the contrary, its measure.  For the being of an existent is precisely the way it appears .  Thus we are led to the idea of the phenomenon as we encounter it, for example, in Husserl’s or Heidegger’s “Phenomenology”: the phenomenon, or the absolute-relative.  The phenomenon remains relative because its “appearing” necessarily implies someone to whom it appears.  But it does not have the twofold relativity of Kant’s Erscheinung .  3 It does not indicate behind its shoulder some true being, a being that is itself the absolute.  It is what it is absolutely, because it is disclosed as it is .  The phenomenon can be studied and described as such, because it is absolutely indicative of itself .  At the same time, the duality of potentiality and actuality will collapse.  4 Everything is in actuality.  Behind the act there is neither potentiality, nor “ hexis, ” 5 nor virtue.  6 The term “genius,” for example—as it is used when we say that Proust “had” great genius or that he “was” a genius—should not be taken to mean a distinctive power to produce various writings, a power that is not exhausted in producing those writings.  Proust’s genius is neither his work considered in isolation nor the subjective power to produce it: it is his work, seen as the set of manifestations of his person.  That is why we can, in the end, also reject the dualism of appearance and essence.  Appearance does not hide essence but reveals it: it is the essence.  The essence of an existent is no longer a power embedded deep inside it; it is the manifest law governing the succession of its appearances, the principle of the series.  Duhem was right to oppose Poincaré’s nominalism—which defined a physical reality (for example, an electrical power) as the sum of its various manifestations—with his own theory, according to which a concept is the synthetic unity of those manifestations.  7 Of course, nothing could be farther from nominalism than phenomenology.  But ultimately, an essence, understood as the principle of a series, is no more than the connection between the appearances—which means it is itself an appearance.  That explains how an intuition of essences (Husserl’s Wesenschau , for example) is possible.  8 Thus phenomenal being manifests itself: it manifests its essence just as much as its existence, and it is nothing but the interconnected series of these manifestations.  Does this mean we have succeeded in eliminating all dualisms by reducing the existent to its manifestations? It seems rather that we have converted them all into one new dualism: the finite and the infinite.  For the existent cannot be reduced to a finite series of manifestations, as each of these is a relationship to a constantly changing subject.  While an object may only be given through a single “ Abschattung ,” the mere fact of being a subject implies the possibility of multiplying the points of view on to that “ Abschattung .” 9 This amounts to multiplying the “ Abschattung ” in question to infinity.  Furthermore, if the series of appearances was finite, it would follow (absurdly) that the ones appearing first could not reappear or (even more absurdly) that they could all be given at the same time.  We need to be quite clear that our theory of the phenomenon has replaced the thing’s reality with the phenomenon’s objectivity , and that it founds this latter by appealing to the infinite.  The reality of this cup is that it is there, and that it is not me.  We can express this by saying that the series of its appearances is connected by a principle that does not depend on my whim.  But an appearance considered just as it is—without reference to the series to which it belongs—can only be an intuitive and subjective plenitude: the way in which the subject is affected.  If a phenomenon is to show itself as transcendent , the subject himself must transcend the appearance toward the total series of which it is a member.  He must grasp redness —i.e., the principle of the series—through his impression of red; the electric current through the electrolysis, etc.  But if the object’s transcendence is grounded in the necessity that any appearance can be transcended, it follows axiomatically that the series of appearances for any object is posited as infinite.  Thus, a finite appearance indicates itself in its finitude, but at the same time, in order to be grasped as an appearance-of-that-which-appears, it demands to be surpassed toward the infinite.  This new opposition, the “finite and the infinite” or, better still, “the infinite within the finite,” replaces the dualism of being and appearing: what appears is in effect only an aspect of the object, and the object is entirely within this aspect and entirely outside it.  Entirely inside insofar as it manifests itself in this aspect: it is indicated as the structure of the appearance, which is at the same time the principle of the series.  Entirely outside , because the series itself never appears, and cannot appear.  Thus, once again, the outside is opposed to the inside, and the being-that-does-not-appear is opposed to its appearance.  Similarly, a certain “power” returns to the phenomenon, inhabiting it and endowing it with its very transcendence: the power to be developed through a series of real or possible appearances.  Even if we reduce Proust’s genius to the works he produced, it is still equivalent to the infinity of possible points of view that we can take up on Proust’s work—its so-called inexhaustibility.  But isn’t this inexhaustibility, which implies a transcendence and an appeal to the infinite, a “ hexis ”—even at the very moment in which we apprehend it in the object? In the end, the essence is radically cut off from any individual appearance that manifests it, because it must be possible, as a matter of principle, for it to be manifested by a series of individual manifestations.  By replacing in this way a variety of oppositions with a single dualism that founds them all, have we gained or lost? Soon we shall see.  For now, the primary consequence of the “theory of the phenomenon” is that the appearance does not refer to being in the way in which the phenomenon, in Kantian philosophy, refers to the noumenon.  Because there is nothing behind the appearance, and it indicates nothing more than itself (and the total series of appearances), it cannot be supported by any being other than its own, and cannot therefore be the thin skin of nothingness separating subject-being from absolute-being.  If the essence of appearance is an “appearing” that is no longer opposed to any being , there is a genuine problem of the being of this appearing .  This is the problem with which we are concerned here, and it will be the point of departure for our investigations into being and nothingness.  II.  THE PHENOMENON OF BEING AND THE BEING OF THE PHENOMENON An appearance is not supported by some other, different, existent: it has its own being .  The first being that we encounter in our ontological investigations is, therefore, the being of appearance.  Is that being itself an appearance? So it seems, at first sight.  A phenomenon is something that manifests itself, and being manifests itself in some way to all of us, since we can talk about it and have some understanding of it.  Thus there must be a phenomenon of being , an appearing of being, that can be described as such.  Being will be disclosed to us through some immediate means of access (boredom, nausea, etc.), and ontology will be the description of the phenomenon of being as it manifests itself, i.e., without intermediary.  However, for any ontology, we need to ask a preliminary question: Is the phenomenon of being that we reach by these means identical to the being of the phenomena? Or: Is the being that is disclosed to me, that appears to me, the same in nature as the being of the existents that appear to me? Here there seems to be no problem: Husserl showed us how an eidetic reduction is always possible—in other words, how we can always surpass a concrete phenomenon toward its essence—and, for Heidegger, “human-reality” is ontico-ontological, which means it can always surpass the phenomenon toward its being.  10 But to move from a particular object to its essence is to move between two homogeneous items.  Can the same be said of the movement from an existent to the phenomenon of being? In surpassing an existent toward the phenomenon of being, are we really surpassing it toward its being, as we might surpass a particular red toward its essence? Let us take a closer look.  In a particular object, we may always distinguish qualities such as color, smell, etc.  And, on the basis of these, we can always establish the essence they imply—just as a sign implies its meaning.  The “object–essence” pair is an organized whole: the essence is not inside the object; it is the object’s meaning, the principle of the series of appearances which disclose it.  But the object’s being is neither one of its qualities, capable of being grasped among others, nor is it a meaning of the object.  The object does not refer to being as it might refer to a meaning: it is not possible, for example, to define being as a presence , since absence also discloses being, since not being there is still a way of being.  The object does not possess being, and its existence is not a participation in being or any other kind of relation.  The only way to define its way of being is to say that it is ; for the object does not conceal being but neither does it disclose it.  It does not conceal it: it would be futile to set aside some of an existent’s qualities, to try to find its being behind them; its being belongs to all of them equally.  It does not disclose it: it would be futile to appeal to the object in order to apprehend its being.  The existent is phenomenal; in other words, it designates itself as an organized set of qualities.  Itself , and not its being.  Being is merely the condition of any disclosure: it is being-in-order-to-disclose, not being disclosed.  What, then, does Heidegger mean when he speaks of a “surpassing toward the ontological?” Of course, I can surpass this table or this chair toward its being, and I can pose the question of the table-being or chair-being.  But in that moment I look away from the table-phenomenon in order to fasten on the being-phenomenon, which is no longer the condition of all disclosure but which is itself something disclosed, an appearance which, as such, needs in its turn some being on whose foundation it could be disclosed.  If the being of phenomena cannot be resolved into a phenomenon of being, and if, however, we can only say anything about being by consulting this phenomenon of being, we must establish first and foremost the exact nature of the relationship that joins the phenomenon of being to the being of the phenomenon.  This will be easier if we note that all our observations so far were directly inspired by the revealing intuition of the phenomenon of being.  By considering being not as the condition of disclosure but rather as an appearance that can be fixed in concepts, we have understood in the first place that knowledge alone cannot account for being, i.e., that the being of the phenomenon cannot be reduced to the phenomenon of being.  In brief, the phenomenon of being is “ontological” in the sense in which Saint Anselm’s and Descartes’s proof is called ontological .  It is a call for being: it requires, insofar as it is a phenomenon, a transphenomenal foundation.  The phenomenon of being requires the transphenomenality of being.  That does not mean that being is hidden behind the phenomena (we saw that the phenomenon cannot mask being), nor that the phenomenon is an appearance that refers to a being distinct from it (the phenomenon has being qua appearance , i.e., it indicates itself on the foundation of being).  The preceding considerations imply that, although the being of the phenomenon is coextensive with the phenomenon, it must escape the phenomenal condition in which existence is possible only to the extent that it is revealed, and consequently that it overflows and founds any knowledge we can have of it.  III.  THE PREREFLECTIVE COGITO AND THE BEING OF THE PERCIPERE One might be tempted to reply that all the difficulties mentioned so far stem from a particular conception of being, a kind of ontological realism that is wholly incompatible with the very idea of appearance .  Indeed, the being of an appearance is proportionate to its appearing .  And since we have limited reality to the phenomenal, we can say of the phenomenon that it is as it appears .  Why not pursue this idea right to its limit and say that the being of an appearance is its appearing? That is simply a way of clothing Berkeley’s venerable phrase “ Esse est percipi ” in new words.  And effectively, that is just what Husserl does when, having carried out the phenomenological reduction, 11 he treats the noema as irreal and declares its “ esse ” to be a “ percipi .” 12 Berkeley’s famous formula seems unlikely to satisfy us.  And essentially this is for two reasons: first, because of the nature of the percipi , and second, because of the nature of the percipere .  The nature of the “ percipere ”—If any metaphysics presupposes a theory of knowledge, it is equally true that any theory of knowledge presupposes a metaphysics.  That means, among other things, that any idealism aiming to reduce being to our knowledge of it must first account in some way for the being of knowledge.  If, on the contrary, you begin by positing the latter as a given—without any concern to found its being—and you go on to claim that “ esse est percipi ,” the “perception-perceived” totality, deprived of any solid being to support it, will collapse into nothingness.  Thus the being of knowledge cannot be measured by knowledge; it escapes the “ percipi .” 13 Thus the foundation-being of the percipere and of the percipi must itself escape the percipi : it must be transphenomenal.  We are back where we began.  However, one might allow that the percipi refers to a being that escapes the laws of appearance while still maintaining that this transphenomenal being is the subject ’s being.  The percipi would therefore direct us toward the percipiens —the known toward the knowledge—and this latter to the knowing being insofar as he is , and not insofar as he is known, i.e., to consciousness.  Husserl understood this: for if in his view the noema is an irreal correlative of the noesis, whose ontological law is the percipi , he regards the noesis on the contrary as reality , whose chief characteristic is to offer itself up to the reflection that knows it as “having already been there first.” For the law of being that governs the knowing subject is being-conscious .  Consciousness is not a special kind of knowledge, called “inner sense” or “self-knowledge”; it is the subject’s dimension of transphenomenal being.  Let us try to improve our understanding of this dimension of being.  We said that consciousness is the knowing being insofar as he is , and not insofar as he is known.  In consequence, we ought to abandon the primacy of knowledge if we want to found that knowledge itself.  And, without doubt, consciousness can know and it can know itself.  But it is, in itself, something other than knowledge turned back on itself.  As Husserl showed, all consciousness is consciousness of something.  14 In other words, there is no act of consciousness that does not posit a transcendent object or, if you prefer, consciousness has no “content.” We need to give up these neutral “givens” that can constitute themselves, according to the chosen system of reference, into the “world” or the “psyche.” A table is not in consciousness, not even as a representation.  A table is in space, beside the window, etc.  Indeed, the table’s existence is a center of opacity for consciousness; an infinite process would be required to make an inventory of the total content of a thing.  To introduce this opacity within consciousness would be to refer to infinity any inventory that consciousness might make of itself, to turn consciousness into a thing, and to reject the cogito .  Philosophy’s first course of action, therefore, should be to expel things from consciousness and to restore the true relationship between this latter and the world: namely, that consciousness is a positional consciousness of the world.  All consciousness is positional in that it transcends itself to reach an object, and it is exhausted by just this act of positing.  All that is intentional in my consciousness is directed outside, toward the table: all my judicative or practical activities, and all the affectivity of the moment, transcend themselves; they aim at the table, and are absorbed within it.  Not every act of consciousness is a form of knowledge (for example, there are affective modes of consciousness), but every knowing consciousness can only be knowledge of its object.  Nonetheless, the necessary and sufficient condition for a knowing consciousness to be knowledge of its object is that it should be conscious of itself as being this knowledge.  It is a necessary condition: if my consciousness were not conscious of being conscious of a table, it would thereby be conscious of the table without being conscious that it was so or, alternatively, it would be a consciousness that did not know itself, an unconscious consciousness—which is absurd.  It is a sufficient condition: my being conscious of being conscious of the table suffices for me in fact to be conscious of it.  It is not of course sufficient to enable me to claim that the table exists in itself —but rather that it exists for me .  What is this consciousness of consciousness? We are in the grip of the illusion of the primacy of knowledge to such an extent that we are willing to turn our consciousness of consciousness immediately into an idea ideae , as Spinoza does 15 —in other words, to turn it into a knowledge of knowledge.  When Alain comes to express the evident fact that “to know is to be conscious of knowing,” he translates it into these terms: “To know is to know that one knows.” What is hereby defined is reflection , or the positional consciousness of consciousness or, better still, knowledge of consciousness .  This is to be understood as an act of consciousness that is complete in itself and directed toward something that it is not—in other words, toward the reflected consciousness.  It thus transcends itself and, like our positional consciousness of the world, its aiming at its object exhausts it.  Only in this case its object is itself an act of consciousness.  This interpretation of the consciousness of consciousness does not seem acceptable.  The reduction of consciousness to knowledge effectively imports the subject-object duality—which is typical of knowledge—within consciousness.  But if we accept the law of the knowing-known dyad, a third term will become necessary for the knowing in its turn to become known, and we are placed in a dilemma.  Either we stop at some term within the series: the known, the knowing that is known, the knowing of the knowing that is known, etc.—in which case the phenomenon in its totality collapses into the unknown (i.e., we always come up against a reflection that is not conscious of itself and is the final term)—or we declare an infinite regress ( idea ideae ideae , etc.) to be necessary, which is absurd.  In this way the necessity of ontologically founding knowledge is duplicated by a new necessity: that of founding it epistemologically.  Surely we ought not to introduce the law of the dyad into consciousness? Consciousness of self is not a dyad.  If we want to avoid an infinite regress, it must be an immediate and noncognitive relationship of self to self.  Moreover, reflective consciousness posits the reflected consciousness as its object: in the act of reflection, I bring judgments to bear on my reflected consciousness; I am ashamed of it, I am proud of it, I want it, I reject it, etc.  The immediate consciousness that I have of perceiving does not allow me either to judge, or to want, or to be ashamed.  It does not know my perception, or posit it: all that is intentional within my current act of consciousness is directed outward, toward the world.  On the other hand, this spontaneous consciousness that I have of my perception is constitutive of my perceptual consciousness.  In other words, any positional consciousness of an object is at the same time a nonpositional consciousness of itself.  If I count the cigarettes that are in this case, my impression is that of disclosing an objective property of this group of cigarettes: they are twelve .  This property appears to my consciousness as a property existing in the world.  I may well have no positional consciousness at all of counting them.  I do not “know myself as counting.” Proof of this can be seen in the fact that children who are capable of spontaneous addition are unable to explain afterward how they did it.  The tests by Piaget which demonstrated this constitute an excellent refutation of Alain’s formula: To know is to know that one knows.  And yet, at the moment when these cigarettes disclose themselves to me as “twelve,” I am non-thetically conscious of my adding activity.  16 Indeed, if I am questioned, if someone asks me “What are you doing?” I will reply immediately “I am counting,” and my reply does not aim only at the instantaneous act of consciousness that I can reach through reflection but also at those acts of consciousness that have passed by without being reflected on, which will forever remain unreflected in my immediate past.  Thus, reflection lacks any kind of primacy in relation to reflected consciousness: it is not by means of the former that the latter is revealed to itself.  On the contrary, nonreflective consciousness is what makes reflection possible: there is a prereflective cogito , which is the condition of the Cartesian cogito .  At the same time, my non-thetic consciousness of counting is actually the condition of my activity of addition.  How, if it were otherwise, could addition be the unifying theme of my acts of consciousness? In order for that theme to preside over the whole series of syntheses of unifications and of recognitions, it must be present to itself, not in the manner of a thing but as an operative intention that can exist only—to use an expression of Heidegger’s—as a “revealing-revealed.” 17 Thus, in order to count, it is necessary to be conscious of counting.  “Of course,” it might be said, “but that is circular.” Because isn’t it necessary, for me to be able to be conscious of counting, that in fact I am counting? That is true.  However, that does not lead to a circle—or, alternatively, it is the very nature of consciousness to exist “in a circle.” We can express this in these terms: any conscious existence exists as the consciousness of existing.  We can understand now why the most basic consciousness of consciousness is not positional: because it and the consciousness of which it is conscious are one and the same.  In a single movement, consciousness determines itself as consciousness of perception, and as perception.  The requirements of syntax here have obliged us until now to talk of “nonpositional consciousness of self.” But we cannot go on using this expression, in which the phrase “ of self ” still evokes the idea of knowledge.  (From now on we will put the “of” between brackets, to indicate that it answers only to a grammatical constraint.) 18 We should not regard this consciousness (of) self as a new act of consciousness but as the only possible mode of existence for any consciousness of something .  Just as an extended object is constrained to exist in three dimensions, so an intention, a pleasure, and a pain can exist only as immediately conscious (of) themselves.  The being of an intention can only be consciousness; otherwise the intention would be a thing inside consciousness.  We must not therefore take this to mean that some external cause (an organic disturbance, an unconscious drive, another “ Erlebnis ”) 19 can determine the production of a psychological event—a pleasure, for example—and that the event whose material structure is hereby determined will in addition be compelled to produce itself as conscious (of) self.  That would make non-thetic consciousness into a quality of positional consciousness (in the sense in which perception—as a positional consciousness of that table—might have the additional quality of consciousness (of) self), and would thereby lead us back to the illusion of the theoretical primacy of knowledge.  In addition, it would turn the psychological event into a thing and qualify it as conscious, as I may qualify, for example, this blotting paper as pink.  Pleasure cannot be distinguished—even logically—from the consciousness of pleasure.  The consciousness (of) pleasure is constitutive of pleasure, as its very mode of existence, as the matter of which it is made, and not as a form that is subsequently imposed on some hedonic matter.  Pleasure cannot exist “before” any consciousness of pleasure—not even in virtual form, or as a potentiality.  A potential pleasure can exist only as a consciousness (of) its potentiality; there are no virtualities in consciousness that are not conscious of being virtual.  Conversely, as I showed earlier, we must avoid defining pleasure in terms of my consciousness of it.  That would push us into an idealist view of consciousness that would lead us back—in a roundabout way—to the primacy of knowledge.  We must not let pleasure disappear behind its consciousness (of) itself: it is not a representation but a concrete, full, and absolute event.  Pleasure is no more a quality of consciousness (of) self than consciousness (of) self is a quality of pleasure.  It is no more true that there is first a consciousness which afterward becomes affected by “pleasure”—like water being dyed—than that there is first a pleasure (unconscious or psychological) which afterward receives the quality of being conscious, like a beam of light.  There is one indivisible and indissoluble being—not a substance that supports its qualities as lesser beings but a being that is existence through and through.  The pleasure is the being of the consciousness (of) self, and consciousness (of) self is the pleasure’s law of being.  Heidegger formulates this well when he writes (about “ Dasein ,” to be exact, rather than consciousness) that “the ‘how’ ( essentia ) of this being must, if it is possible to speak of it at all, be conceived in terms of its being ( existentia ).” 20 This means that consciousness is not produced as a particular exemplar of an abstract possibility but that, in arising in the heart of being, it creates and maintains its essence, i.e., the synthetic arrangement of its possibilities.  This also means that the being of consciousness is opposite in type to the being revealed to us by the ontological proof: as consciousness is not possible before being but instead comprises—in its being—the source and condition of all possibility, its existence implies its essence.  This is felicitously expressed by Husserl as its “factual necessity.” 21 For there to be an essence of pleasure, there must first be the fact of some consciousness (of) this pleasure.  And any attempt to invoke the alleged laws of consciousness, whose articulated sum would be said to constitute its essence, will be futile: a law is a transcendent object of consciousness; it is possible to have consciousness of a law but not a law of consciousness.  For the same reasons, it is impossible to assign to consciousness any motivation other than itself.  Otherwise we would need to conceive of consciousness, to the extent to which it is an effect, as not being conscious (of) itself.  In some respect, consciousness would need to be without being conscious (of) being.  We would succumb to that all-too-common illusion that makes consciousness into something half-unconscious, or passivity.  But consciousness is consciousness through and through.  It cannot therefore be limited by anything other than itself.  We must not conceive of this determination of consciousness by itself as a genesis, or a becoming, because that would require us to suppose that consciousness is prior to its own existence.  Nor must we conceive of this self-creation as an act.  In that case consciousness would be consciousness (of) itself as an act, which it isn’t.  Consciousness is a plenum of existence and this determining of itself by itself is an essential characteristic.  We must be careful not to misuse the expression “cause of itself,” which can lead one to suppose a progression, a relationship between a self-cause and a self-effect.  It would be more accurate to say, quite simply, that consciousness exists through itself.  And by this we do not mean that it is “drawn out of nothingness.” 22 There could not be any “nothingness of consciousness” before consciousness.  23 “Before” consciousness we can conceive only of a plenum of being, no element of which could refer to an absent consciousness.  For there to be a nothingness of consciousness, we would need a consciousness that has existed and is no longer, and a witness consciousness positing the nothingness of the first consciousness in the service of a synthesis of recognitions.  Consciousness is prior to nothingness, and “derives from being.” 24 Perhaps these conclusions are difficult to accept.  But, examined more carefully, they seem perfectly clear: the paradox is not that some existences exist through themselves but that there are any that do not.  What is genuinely unthinkable is passive existence—in other words, an existence that can perpetuate itself without having enough power either to produce or to conserve itself.  From this point of view, nothing could be more unintelligible than the principle of inertia.  For if consciousness were indeed able to “come from” something else, where would it “come from?” Out of the limbo of the unconscious, or the physiological.  But if we ask, in turn, how such a limbo can exist and how it derives its existence, we find ourselves led back to the concept of passive existence.  In other words, we are absolutely unable to understand how these givens—which are not conscious and do not derive their existence from themselves—might nonetheless perpetuate this existence, and even find the power to produce a consciousness.  We can see a clear symptom of this in the huge popularity of the proof “ a contingentia mundi .” 25 Thus, by renouncing the primacy of knowledge, we have discovered the being of the knower and encountered the absolute—that same absolute that the seventeenth-century rationalists defined, and constituted logically, as an object of knowledge.  But, precisely because we are concerned here with an absolute existence rather than knowledge, we escape the well-known objection, according to which a known absolute can no longer be absolute, because it becomes relative to the knowledge we have of it.  For here the absolute is not the result of a logical construction in the field of knowledge but the subject of the most concrete experiences.  And it is in no way relative to this experience, because it is this experience.  It is therefore a non-substantial absolute.  The ontological error of Cartesian rationalism was not to have seen that, if we define the absolute in terms of the primacy of existence over essence, we cannot conceive of it as a substance.  There is nothing substantial about consciousness; it is a pure “appearance,” where this means it exists only to the extent to which it appears.  But it is precisely because consciousness is pure appearance, because it is a total void (since the entire world is outside it), because of this identity within it between its appearance and its existence, that it can be considered as the absolute.  IV.  THE BEING OF THE PERCIPI We appear to have reached the end of our investigation.  Having reduced things to the combined totality of their appearances, we noted that these appearances called for a being that was no longer itself an appearance.  The “ percipi ” directed us to a “ percipiens ,” whose being was revealed to us as consciousness.  Thus we have reached the ontological foundation of knowledge: the first being, to whom all other appearances appear; the absolute, in relation to which each phenomenon is relative.  This being is not “the subject,” in the Kantian sense of the term but subjectivity itself, in its self-immanence.  In arriving here, we have escaped idealism, according to which being is measured by knowledge and is therefore subject to the law of duality.  For idealism, all being is known, including thought itself: thought appears to itself only through its own products, such that we only ever grasp it as the meaning of thoughts that have occurred, and the philosopher in search of thought is obliged to consult the constituted sciences in order to derive thought from them as their condition of possibility.  We have apprehended a being, on the contrary, that escapes and founds our knowledge, and we have laid hold of thought, not as it is given in representation, or as the meaning of thoughts that have been expressed, but directly, as it is—and this mode of apprehension is not a phenomenon of knowledge but the structure of being.  We find ourselves here on the terrain of Husserlian phenomenology, even though Husserl himself was not always faithful to his primary intuition.  Are we satisfied? We have found a transphenomenal being, but is that really the being to which the phenomenon of being points? Is it really the “being of the phenomenon?” In other words, is the being of consciousness sufficient to found the being of appearance qua appearance? We have robbed the phenomenon of its being, in order to give it to consciousness, and we expected consciousness subsequently to return it.  Is consciousness able to do that? By examining the ontological requirements of the percipi , we will find out.  We should note at the outset that there is a being of the perceived thing qua perceived.  Even if I wanted to reduce this table to a synthesis of subjective impressions, I would have to notice at least that it reveals itself as a table through that synthesis, of which it is the transcendent limit, the principle, and the goal.  The table stands before our knowledge, and it cannot be assimilated to the knowledge we gain from it; otherwise it would be consciousness—i.e., pure immanence—and would dissolve as a table.  On the same grounds, even if what separates the table from the synthesis of subjective impressions through which it is apprehended is purely a distinction within reason, at least the table cannot be this synthesis: that would be to reduce it to a synthetic activity of combination.  26 Insofar, then, as the known cannot be absorbed into our knowledge of it, we must recognize its being .  This being, we are told, is the percipi .  Let us acknowledge from the outset that we can no more reduce the being of the percipi to that of the percipiens —i.e., to consciousness—than we can reduce the table to the combination of representations.  The most we can say is that it is relative to that being.  But this relativity does not excuse us from the need to inspect the percipi ’s being.  Now, the mode of the percipi is passive .  If, then, the phenomenon’s being resides in its percipi , its being will be passivity .  The characteristic structures of esse , insofar as it can be reduced to percipi , turn out to be relativity and passivity.  What is passivity? I am passive when I undergo a modification of which I am not the origin—that is to say, neither the foundation nor the creator.  Thus my being supports a way of being of which it is not the source.  Only, to be able to support something, I still need to exist, and my existence is in consequence always located beyond passivity.  For example, “passively supporting” something is an attitude that I uphold , which engages my freedom just as much as “resolutely rejecting” it.  If I am to be forever “the person who was offended,” I must persevere in my being; in other words, I must assign existence to myself.  27 But, in so doing, I take up the offense on my own account in some way; I accept this offense, and I cease to be passive in relation to it.  The result is this alternative: either I am not passive in my being—in which case I become the foundation of the ways I am affected, even if I was not at first their origin—or I am characterized by passivity in my very existence, and my being is received—in which case everything collapses into nothingness.  Hence passivity is a doubly relative phenomenon: relative to the agent’s activity, and to the patient’s existence.  From this it follows that passivity does not involve the very being of the passive existent: it is a relation between one being and another being, and not between a being and a nothingness.  It is impossible for the percipere to assign the perceptum its being because, in order to be assigned anything, the perceptum would already need to be given in some way and thus to exist before receiving its being.  We may think in terms of creation , on condition that the created being takes possession of itself, and separates itself from its creator in order immediately to close in on itself and take up its being: it is in this sense that a book exists against its author.  But if the act of creation needs to be continued indefinitely, if the created being is supported even in its minutest parts, if it has no proper independence, if it is in itself only nothingness, then the creature cannot be distinguished at all from its creator but is reabsorbed within him; what we have here is a false transcendence, and the creator cannot even have the illusion of leaving his subjectivity behind.  28 Moreover, the passivity of the patient demands an equal passivity in the agent.  This idea finds expression in the principle of action and reaction: it is because it is possible to crush my hand, to grasp it or to cut it that my hand can crush, cut, or grasp.  How much passivity should we attribute to perception, to knowledge? They are entirely active, entirely spontaneous.  It is precisely because it is pure spontaneity, because nothing can bite into it, that consciousness cannot act on anything.  Hence, the doctrine of esse est percipi requires that consciousness, a pure spontaneity unable to act on anything, should bestow being on a transcendent nothingness while preserving the nothingness of its being—and this is absurd.  Husserl attempted to ward off these objections by introducing passivity into the noesis : namely the hyle , 29 the pure flux of what is lived through, the materiality of the passive syntheses.  But all he did was to add a further difficulty to those we have mentioned.  In effect, he reintroduced those neutral “givens” whose impossibility we demonstrated earlier.  Of course, these are not “contents” of consciousness, but that only adds to their unintelligibility.  For the hyle cannot in fact belong to consciousness, or it would dissolve into translucency and be unable to provide the resistant impressional 30 base that we surpass toward the object.  But if it does not belong to consciousness, what is the source of its being and its opacity? How can it retain at one and the same time the opaque resistance of things and the subjectivity of thought? Since it is not even perceived, and since consciousness transcends it toward its objects, its esse cannot derive from a percipi .  But if we say that it derives its essence only from itself, we return to the insoluble problem of how consciousness can relate to any independent existents.  And even if we were to concede to Husserl that the noesis has a hyletic layer, we would still be unable to conceive how consciousness could transcend this subjective element toward objectivity.  By endowing the hyle with the characteristics of a thing and the characteristics of consciousness, Husserl believed he could facilitate the passage from one to the other, but he succeeded only in creating a hybrid being that consciousness rejects and that cannot be part of the world.  But in addition, as we saw, the percipi implies that relativity governs the being of the perceptum .  Is it conceivable that the being of the known should be relative to our knowledge of it? What could the relativity of its being mean, in the case of an existent, other than that the existent’s being lies in something other than itself—in other words, in an existent that it is not ? Admittedly, it is not inconceivable for a being to be external to itself, if we take this to mean that the being is its own externality.  But that is not the case here.  The perceived being stands before a consciousness that it cannot penetrate and that cannot make contact with it, and as it is cut off from consciousness, it exists cut off from its own existence.  It is no use to claim, as Husserl did, that it is irreal: even if the status of what is perceived is irreal, it has to exist.  Thus, there is no case in which either of the two determinations of relativity and passivity —which concern ways of being—is applicable to being itself.  The esse of the phenomenon cannot be its percipi .  The transphenomenal being of consciousness cannot provide the foundation for the phenomenon’s transphenomenal being.  We can see the phenomenalists’ mistake: having correctly reduced the object to the series of its combined appearances, they thought they had reduced its being to the succession of its ways of being.  That is why they tried to explain being in terms of concepts which apply only to ways of being, because they refer to relations between a plurality of beings that already exist.  V.  THE ONTOLOGICAL PROOF We have not given being its due: we thought that our discovery of the transphenomenality of the being of consciousness excused us from the need to grant any transphenomenal being to the phenomenon.  On the contrary, as we will see, the transphenomenality of consciousness actually requires the phenomenon’s being to be transphenomenal.  We can derive an “ontological proof,” not from the reflective cogito but from the prereflective being of the percipiens .  Let us try to set it out here.  All consciousness is consciousness of something.  We can take this definition of consciousness in two quite distinct ways: we can take it to mean either that consciousness is constitutive of its object’s being, or that consciousness is in its innermost nature related to a transcendent being.  But the first interpretation of the phrase destroys itself: to be conscious of something is to confront a full and concrete presence that is not consciousness.  Doubtless, one can be conscious of an absence.  But that absence must necessarily appear against a ground of presence.  Now, as we have seen, consciousness is a real subjectivity, and an impression is a subjective plenitude.  But this subjectivity cannot step outside itself in order to posit a transcendent object by conferring upon it the plenitude of the impression.  If, therefore, we want at any cost to make the phenomenon’s being depend on consciousness, the object will need to distinguish itself from consciousness not through its presence but through its absence , not through its plenitude but through its nothingness.  If being belongs to consciousness, the object must differ from consciousness not insofar as it is another being but insofar as it is a non-being.  Here we have the recourse to the infinite that we discussed in the first section of this work.  For Husserl, for example, the animation of the hyletic core by only those intentions which find their fulfillment 31 ( Erfüllung ) in that hyle is not sufficient to take us out of the domain of subjectivity.  The genuinely objectifying intentions 32 are empty intentions—intentions that aim, beyond the present and subjective appearance, at the infinite totality of the series of appearances.  Let us be clear, moreover, that these intentions aim at them as appearances that cannot ever be given all at the same time.  The fact that it is necessarily impossible for the infinite number of terms in the series to stand before consciousness simultaneously, in conjunction with the fact that all but one of these terms is really absent, is the foundation of objectivity.  If these impressions were present—even if their number were infinite—they would become merged into subjectivity; their absence is what gives them objective being.  Thus, the object’s being is a pure non-being.  It defines itself as a lack .  It is elusive, something that, as a matter of principle, can never be given, that is delivered through successive, fleeting profiles.  But how can non-being be the foundation of being? How can something that is subjectively absent and expected thereby become objective? I will grant that a great joy that I am hoping for, or a sorrow that I fear, may thereby acquire a kind of transcendence.  But this transcendence within immanence does not take us out of the subjective.  It is true that things are given through profiles—which means, quite simply, through appearances.  But each of these is already on its own a transcendent being , and not a subjective impressional matter—a plenitude of being , not a lack—a presence , not an absence.  It would be fruitless to attempt by sleight of hand to found the object’s reality on the subjective impressional plenitude and its objectivity on non-being: we will never get objectivity out of the subjective, or transcendence out of immanence, or being out of non-being.  But, it might be said, it is precisely as a transcendence that Husserl defines consciousness.  Indeed: that is his postulate and his essential discovery.  But once he makes of the noema something unreal, the correlative of the noesis , and whose esse is a percipi , he completely betrays his own principle.  Consciousness is consciousness of something: therefore transcendence is a constitutive structure of consciousness, which is to say that consciousness is born bearing on a being that it is not.  33 Let us call this the ontological proof.  To this one might reply that a demand on the part of consciousness does not prove that this demand must be satisfied.  But this objection is powerless in relation to an analysis of Husserl’s intentionality, about whose essential character he was mistaken.  To say that consciousness is conscious of something means that the entire being of consciousness is subsumed within this specific obligation: to be a revealing intuition of something, i.e., of a transcendent being.  Pure subjectivity, if that is what is given first, will not only fail to transcend itself in order to posit anything objective but, in addition, any “pure” subjectivity will dissolve.  Used properly, the term “subjectivity” refers to a consciousness (of) consciousness.  But this consciousness (of being) consciousness must in some way be qualified, and it can only be qualified as a revealing intuition; otherwise it is nothing.  Now, a revealing intuition implies something revealed.  Absolute subjectivity can constitute itself only in relation to something revealed; immanence can define itself only in its grasp of something transcendent.  This may sound like an echo of Kant’s refutation of problematic idealism.  But really we should be thinking of Descartes.  We are at the level of being here, not of knowledge: it is not a matter of showing that the phenomena of inner sense imply the existence of objective and spatial phenomena but that consciousness implies in its being a non-conscious and transphenomenal being.  In particular, it is pointless to reply that subjectivity does in fact imply objectivity, and that in constituting the objective domain it constitutes itself: we have seen that subjectivity lacks any power to constitute the objective.  To say that consciousness is conscious of something is to say that it must produce itself as the revealed revelation of a being that it is not, and which is given as already existing when it is revealed.  In this way, having set out from pure appearance, we have arrived in the fullness of being.  Consciousness is a being whose existence posits its essence and, inversely, it is conscious of a being whose essence implies its existence, i.e., a being whose appearance demands being .  Being is everywhere.  Admittedly, we could apply to consciousness the definition that Heidegger reserves for Dasein , and say that it is a being for whom, in its being, its being is in question 34 —but one would have to complete it and formulate it roughly like this: Consciousness is a being for whom in its being there is a question of its being, insofar as this being implies a being other than itself .  Naturally, this being is nothing other than the transphenomenal being of phenomena and not a noumenal being hiding behind them.  Consciousness implies the being of this table, of this packet of tobacco, of the lamp, and, more generally, the being of the world.  Consciousness requires simply that the being of that which appears does not exist only insofar as it appears.  The transphenomenal being of that which is for consciousness is itself in itself .  VI.  BEING IN ITSELF We are able now to provide some clarification of the phenomenon of being that we consulted in order to establish our preceding remarks.  Consciousness is a revealed-revelation of existents, and these existents appear before consciousness on the foundation of their being.  Nevertheless, it is characteristic of the being of an existent not to disclose itself , in person, to consciousness.  An existent cannot be stripped of its being: being is the existent’s ever-present foundation; it is in it everywhere, and it is nowhere; there is no being that is not the being of some way of being, and being can be grasped only through the way of being that manifests it and conceals it at the same time.  However, consciousness can always surpass an existent, not toward its being but toward this being’s meaning .  That is what makes it possible to call consciousness “ontico-ontological,” because a fundamental characteristic of its transcendence is to transcend the ontic toward the ontological.  The meaning of the existent’s being, insofar as it discloses itself to consciousness, is the phenomenon of being.  This meaning itself has a being, on whose foundation it manifests itself.  It is from this point of view that the well-known Scholastic argument can be understood, according to which there is a vicious circle in any proposition concerning being, since any judgment about being already implies being.  But in fact there is no vicious circle, because it is not necessary to surpass the being of this meaning again, toward its meaning; the meaning of being is the same for the being of any phenomenon, including its own being.  The phenomenon of being is not the same as being, as we have already noted.  But it indicates being, and requires it—although, in truth, the ontological proof that we mentioned earlier does not apply especially or uniquely to it: there is one ontological proof, which applies to the whole domain of consciousness.  But this proof is sufficient to justify everything we can learn from the phenomenon of being.  The phenomenon of being, like any basic phenomenon, is disclosed immediately to consciousness.  At every moment we have what Heidegger calls a “preontological understanding” of it, which means an understanding that has not been fixed in concepts or elucidated.  What we should do now, therefore, is to examine this phenomenon and try by this means to determine the meaning of being.  However, we must note that: (1) this elucidation of the meaning of being only applies to the being of the phenomenon.  As the being of consciousness is radically different, its meaning will require its own distinctive elucidation based on the revealed-revelation of another type of being, being-for-itself, which we will define later, and which contrasts with the phenomenon’s being-in-itself; (2) the elucidation of the meaning of being-in-itself that we will attempt here can only be provisional.  The aspects that will be brought to light imply other meanings, which must be apprehended and determined at a later stage.  The preceding reflections have in particular allowed us to distinguish two absolutely distinct regions of being: the being of the prereflective cogito and the being of the phenomenon.  But although the concept of being is, therefore, characterized by its division into two incommunicable regions, we must still explain how these two regions can be placed under the same heading.  That will require us to inspect these two types of being, and it is clear that we will not be able genuinely to apprehend the meaning of either of them until we have established their real relations with the notion of being in general, and the relations that link them.  We have in fact established, by examining the non-positional consciousness (of) self, that the being of the phenomenon cannot in any case act on consciousness.  Through that, we have ruled out a realist conception of the phenomenon’s relations with consciousness.  But we have also shown, by examining the spontaneity of the non-reflective cogito , that if subjectivity was given to consciousness first, it would not be possible for consciousness to step out of it; and neither would consciousness be able to act on transcendent being, or to include the elements of passivity necessary to constitute, without contradiction, a transcendent being on their basis.  We have hereby ruled out the idealist solution to the problem.  We seem to have closed every door, and to have condemned ourselves to seeing transcendent being and consciousness as two enclosed totalities with no possible communication between them.  We will have to show that the problem allows of another solution, beyond realism and idealism.  However, some characteristics can be established immediately, because, for the most part, they show up for themselves in what we have just said.  A clear view of the phenomenon of being has often been clouded by a widespread prejudice that we will call “creationism.” As it was supposed that God had given being to the world, being always appeared to be colored by a certain passivity.  But a creation ex nihilo cannot explain how being arises, because if being is conceived within a subjectivity—even a divine subjectivity—it remains an intrasubjective mode of being.  Within such a subjectivity, objectivity could not even be represented , and, in consequence, it could not even be moved by its will to create something objective.  Moreover, even if being could be placed all of a sudden outside subjectivity by means of the “fulguration” that Leibniz talks about, it could only affirm itself as being in spite of and against its creator; otherwise it would merge back into him.  By removing any “ Selbstständigkeit ” 35 —as the Germans call it—from being, the theory of continuous creation makes it vanish into the divine subjectivity.  If being exists in the face of God, it is because it provides its own support, because it does not retain the faintest trace of divine creation.  In short, even if it had been created, being-in-itself could not be explained by creation because, beyond that creation, it takes up its own being.  That is equivalent to saying that being is uncreated.  But one should not conclude that being creates itself; that would require it to exist antecedently to itself.  Being cannot be causa sui in the manner of consciousness.  Being is itself .  That implies that it is neither passivity nor activity.  Each of these notions is human , and refers to human behavior, or instruments of human behavior.  Activity occurs when a conscious being employs some means with a view to achieving some end.  And we call the objects to which we apply our activity “passive” insofar as they do not spontaneously aim at the end for which we put them to use.  In brief, man is active and the means he employs are said to be “passive.” Taken to the absolute, these concepts lose all meaning.  In particular, being is not active; for there to be any end or means, being is required.  Still less can it be passive, for, to be passive, something must be.  Being’s consistence-in-itself is equally beyond the active and the passive.  It is equally beyond both negation and affirmation.  An affirmation is always the affirmation of something, which is to say that the act of affirming is distinct from the thing affirmed.  But if we imagine an affirmation in which the affirming is filled up by what is affirmed, that affirmation could not be affirmed—because of the surfeit of plenitude and the noema’s immediate inherence within the noesis.  That is indeed what being is if, to clarify our thinking, we define it in terms of consciousness: it is the noema within the noesis, i.e., a self-inherence without the slightest distance.  From this point of view, it would be wrong to call it “immanence,” because immanence is, after all, a relation between something and itself; it is the smallest distance that it is possible for something to have in relation to itself.  But being is not a relation to itself; it is itself .  It is an immanence that cannot be actualized, an affirmation that cannot be affirmed, an activity that cannot act, because it has become thickened by itself.  It is as if a decompression of being were required to liberate an affirmation of itself in the heart of being.  Nor should we understand being as one undifferentiated self-affirmation: the lack of differentiation in the in-itself lies beyond an infinite number of self-affirmations, insofar as there are an infinite number of ways of affirming oneself.  We can sum up these first results by saying that being is in itself .  But if being is in itself, that means it does not refer to itself, unlike consciousness (of) self: this itself is what it is.  Indeed, we reach the point at which the constant reflection that constitutes any “itself” merges into identity.  That is why being is ultimately beyond any itself and our initial formulation cannot be more than an approximation, due to the necessities of language.  36 In fact being is opaque to itself precisely because it is filled with itself.  We can express this better by saying that being is what it is .  This formulation appears to be strictly analytical.  In fact, a great distance separates it from the principle of identity, regarded as the unconditional principle of all analytical judgments.  For a start, it refers to a particular region of being, that of being in itself .  We will see that the being of the for itself is defined, on the contrary, as being what it is not and not being what it is.  We are dealing, therefore, with a principle that is regional and, as such, synthetic.  Moreover this formulation—being in itself is what it is—needs to be contrasted with the one which designates the being of consciousness: this latter, as in fact we will see, has to be what it is.  This informs us of the special sense that we need to give to the “is” in the phrase “being is what it is.” Once there are beings which have to be what they are, the fact of being what one is is not in any way a purely axiomatic characteristic: it is a contingent principle of being in itself.  In this sense, the principle of identity, the principle of analytical judgments, is also a regional synthetic principle of being.  It refers to the opacity of being-in-itself.  This opacity is not a function of our position in relation to the in-itself, such that we are obliged to learn about it and observe it because we are situated “outside.” Being-in-itself has no inside that could be opposed to an outside , like a judgment, or law, or self-consciousness.  The in-itself has no secret: it is massive .  In a sense, we can call it a synthesis.  But it is the most indissoluble of syntheses: the synthesis of self with self.  From this it evidently follows that being is isolated in its being, and maintains no relationship with anything else.  Transitions and becomings—anything that allows one to say that being is not yet what it will be, and that it is already what it is not—all of this is necessarily ruled out by being.  Because being is the being of becoming, it is thereby beyond becoming.  It is what it is, which means that, on its own, it cannot even not be what it is not; indeed we saw that it does not include any negation.  It is full positivity.  Thus alterity is unknown to it: it never presents itself as other than some other being; it cannot sustain any relationship with the other.  It is itself indefinitely, and exhausts itself in being it.  From this point of view, as we will see later, it escapes temporality.  It is, and when it collapses, one cannot even say that it is no longer.  Or, at least, a consciousness, precisely because it is temporal, can become conscious of it as no longer being.  But it does not itself exist as something missing from where it was: the full positivity of being re-forms itself where it collapsed.  It was, and now other beings are: that is all.  Finally—this will be our third characteristic—being-in-itself is .  In other words, being can neither be, nor be derived from, the possible, nor can it be equated with the necessary.  Necessity concerns the connection between ideal propositions, not the connection between existents.  A phenomenal existent can never, as an existent, be derived from another existent.  That is called the contingency of being-in-itself.  But neither can being-in-itself be derived from something possible .  The possible is a structure of the for-itself , and so it belongs to the other region of being.  Being-in-itself is never either possible or impossible; it is .  Consciousness expresses this by saying—in anthropomorphic terms—that it is de trop , which is to say that it is absolutely unable to derive it from anything, either from another being, or from something possible, or from a necessary law.  Uncreated, without any reason for being or any relationship with any other being, being-in-itself is de trop for eternity.  Being is.  Being is itself.  Being is what it is.  These are the three features that our provisional examination of the phenomenon of being enables us to assign to the being of phenomena.  For the moment it is impossible to continue our investigation further.  An examination of the in-itself—which is only ever what it is—will not enable us to establish and explicate its relations with the for-itself.  Thus, by taking “appearances” as our point of departure, we have been gradually led to posit two types of being—the in-itself and the for-itself—about which our information is still only incomplete and superficial.  A host of unanswered questions still remain: What is the fundamental meaning of these two types of being? What are the reasons for their both belonging to being in general? What is the meaning of being, insofar as it includes within it these two radically distinct regions of being? If both idealism and realism fail to explain the relations that in fact unite these regions—which are in principle incommunicable—what other solution to this problem can we find? And how can the being of the phenomenon be transphenomenal? My purpose in writing this work has been to try to answer these questions.  Translator’s Introduction T RANSLATOR’S I NTRODUCTION Sarah Richmond L’Être et le Néant is widely and correctly regarded as Sartre’s most important philosophical work, but it attracted little public attention when it first appeared in France in 1943.  Perhaps we should not be surprised, as the Second World War was not yet over and the German Occupation was still in force in northern France.  Today, the place of Being and Nothingness (hereafter BN) 1 within the canon of twentieth-century European philosophy is uncontested, and it is taught, read, and studied across the globe.  In this Introduction my primary aim is to describe BN’s philosophical impact so far, focusing especially on France and the English-speaking world.  As a great deal of Sartre criticism and exegesis is now available, I will only briefly survey the content of the text.  Instead I offer an overview of its reception, to provide the reader with some background to my translation, produced three-quarters of a century later.  For remarks about the practical task of translating it, challenges it has posed, and my reasons for some of my decisions, see the Notes on the Translation.  At the time of BN’s first publication, Sartre had returned to teaching philosophy in the French secondary school system, after an uneventful stint of military service (his poor eyesight meant he was exempt from active combat) and a period spent in a German prisoner-of-war camp.  Although Sartre had published some impressive work in the 1930s, he was not yet well-known, and his reputation as a writer was owed primarily to his 1938 novel ( La Nausée ), some short stories and plays ( Les Mouches was first staged in Paris in 1943), book reviews (mostly of fiction) published in various periodicals, and other journalism.  A year later, after Pathé had commissioned him to write the screenplay for a feature film ( Typhus , which was never made), Sartre believed he could earn a living as a full-time writer and gave up his teaching post.  Not long after that—following his legendary public lecture (subsequently translated as EH) in which Sartre presented a simplified version of his philosophy to a packed audience in Paris in 1945—he became a national figure.  By the 1960s Sartre’s further writings, his association with Simone de Beauvoir, his appearances around the world, and his numerous political interventions had also made him an international figure, a “public intellectual” who is frequently described as the most famous philosopher of the twentieth century.  BN presents itself as a traditional, scholarly, and comprehensive work of philosophy.  Sartre had not yet detached himself from the values of academia, and he adopts the persona of a distinguished professor who has the entire Western philosophical corpus at his fingertips.  “Modern thought,” he tells us in his opening sentence, has “reduced the existent to the series of appearances that manifest it.” How, if at all, do statements of this highly abstract kind bear any relation to the doctrines and slogans that we associate with existentialist philosophy? In fact, as readers are sometimes surprised to discover, the term “existentialist” is applied only retrospectively to the philosophy of BN, and it does not figure in the text.  It does figure importantly in EH, where Sartre sums existentialism up quite simply in the famous claim that “existence comes before essence.” To explain this claim, Sartre (an atheist) contrasts it with a religious conception, according to which we are created by God.  Had God created us, Sartre argues, our essence would precede our existence, as it would be determined by God’s intentions.  But there is no such thing as human nature in a godless world, where “Man is nothing else but what he makes of himself.” This contrast seems to suggest that existentialism is incompatible with religious belief, which would conflict with Sartre’s acknowledgment in the same lecture that Christian existentialism also exists, but we will not pursue this here.  The French title of EH— L’Existentialisme est un Humanisme —asserts the thesis that Sartre will be defending for his audience (and, once it was published, for his readers).  Being and Nothingness is rather more obscure, and its subtitle— An Essay in Phenomenological Ontology —is also unlikely to help anyone without a philosophical training.  Ontology is the philosophical study of being—or of what exists, of what is —in the most general sense, and Sartre’s fundamental claim is elegantly condensed within his title.  In order to account for being , Sartre is saying, we need also to acknowledge nothingness (or non-being).  The relationship between this ontological project and the better-known “existentialist” tenets that are associated with Sartre is in fact straightforward: the former provides the theoretical underpinnings for the latter.  Nothingness explains why we humans are radically free, just as Sartre’s account in BN of the interpersonal orientation he calls “being for the Other” explains why our interpersonal relationships are likely to be hellish.  The philosophy advanced in BN was of course attacked from the outset, in the first instance—and before it had been translated into any other languages—by Sartre’s fellow French intellectuals.  Indeed, just two years after the publication of EN in France, Sartre announces in EH his intention to defend existentialism against several “reproaches.” Sartre is not too bothered by the censure of the “Christians,” for whom atheistic existentialism is incompatible with morality: the points Sartre goes on to make in the lecture are supposed to refute that claim.  He would have been more troubled by the attacks from the political left.  In a discussion of EH that was organized specifically for Sartre to face his opponents, the Communist activist Pierre Naville raised several criticisms that have often been repeated since.  (Indeed, only a year or so later, Herbert Marcuse’s review of BN (Marcuse 1947) sounded a similar hostile Marxist note.) For Naville, Sartre’s rejection of “human nature” was an illusion; rather than abolishing the idea, Sartre was regressively proposing an alternative to it, in the guise of human freedom.  In more explicitly political terms, Naville also accused Sartre of “resurrecting liberalism” (Sartre 1973: 60).  The next most significant date in the history of BN is probably 1956, insofar as Sartre’s international reputation as a philosopher depends—at least in the English-speaking world—on the first (and until now the only) English translation of EN, published in the US in that year.  It was translated by Hazel Barnes (1915–2008), a Classics scholar at the University of Colorado, who took on the task because she admired Sartre’s philosophy and wanted to make it available to the anglophone world.  Barnes’s own work was also important in acquainting English speakers with Sartre’s existentialism: much of her academic output, in the form of books and essays, took the form of critical discussion of his philosophy.  And that was not all: Barnes also presented a series of programs about philosophy on Ohio University radio in 1952, as well as a ten-episode television series about existentialism (broadcast nationally in the United States in the 1960s) entitled Self-Encounter: A Study in Existentialism .  She even classified the memoir that she published in her eighties as a “venture in Existentialist autobiography” (Barnes 1997).  These details alone suffice to show how radically the relations between intellectuals—both within and outside academic institutions—and the wider public culture have changed since the middle of the twentieth century.  Sartre and Barnes had different personalities and intellectual outlooks, but they both believed that philosophy should concern itself with contemporary human existence, and that it should correct our understanding of our existence in a way that would oblige us to live differently.  And people were hungry for these ideas, willing to attend public lectures or to learn more from the radio, newspapers, and television.  The philosophy of BN, with its emphasis on human freedom, agency, and responsibility, may also have held special appeal for a postwar public open to change and desiring a fresh start.  The early reception of EN in the English-speaking world also illustrates an intellectual cosmopolitanism within academic philosophy that is less common in today’s more specialized and professional departments.  In the postwar period, the gulf within philosophy that is still often thought to separate Sartre, as a Continental philosopher, from the anglophone analytical traditions was not yet evident.  Moreover, and especially in the UK, the profile of the philosophers who showed an interest in Sartre’s work—in some cases, even before it had been translated—is remarkable.  A.  J.  Ayer, who was a French speaker and had friends in Paris, published a two-part discussion of Sartre’s work in the journal Horizon in 1945, quoting lengthy passages from it in French.  Iris Murdoch’s first book was a slim volume on Sartre, published in 1953: although she focuses mainly on his novels, she had also read EN (and other nonfiction by Sartre) in French, and her book pays particular attention to the way Sartre’s philosophy influences his fiction.  Later decades saw further contributions by other major British philosophers: Stuart Hampshire reviewed Barnes’s translation in the Observer in 1957, while Alasdair MacIntyre wrote the entry on “Existentialism” for the Encyclopedia of Philosophy published in 1967.  A few years later, MacIntyre also contributed to a collection of critical essays on Sartre edited by Mary Warnock (1971), another prominent Sartre scholar; this collection also included an excellent discussion by Hidé Ishiguro of Sartre’s theory of the imagination which helped to establish Sartre as someone worthy of attention from analytical philosophers of mind.  2 Two lines of thought about Sartre’s philosophy, which jointly exhibit a marked ambivalence, are especially prominent in this first wave of anglophone critical discussion.  On the one hand—and as the legacy of Logical Positivism’s hostility to traditional metaphysics would lead one to expect—there is a dismissive attitude toward Sartre’s ontological framework.  In his review articles, Ayer was particularly harsh about Sartre’s assertions in relation to le néant (“nothingness”), which he judged to be “literally nonsensical” (Ayer 1945: 19).  (Although Ayer does not mention Rudolf Carnap, his criticism here bears a strong resemblance to Carnap’s earlier criticism of Heidegger’s concept of das Nichts , usually translated as “nothing”; nor is this a historical coincidence, as Heidegger’s concept influenced Sartre’s.) 3 Similarly, in his Observer review of BN, Hampshire mentions the malignant influences of Hegel and Heidegger, and asks whether the “sophistries of Hegelian logic” might conceal the banality of some of Sartre’s observations—before conceding, in Sartre’s favor, that his criticism of “traditional theories of mind” is “at too many points convincing for his whole system to be ignored” (Hampshire 1957: 16).  4 On the other hand, British commentators also noted the congruence between Sartre’s phenomenological approach to philosophy in BN (sub-titled “An Essay in Phenomenological Ontology”) and the empiricist tradition in British philosophy.  Iris Murdoch was especially alert to this similarity: “It might even be argued that recent continental philosophers have been discovering, with immense fuss, what the English empiricists have known since Hume, whom Husserl himself claimed as an ancestor” (Murdoch 1967: 8).  5 Sartre had studied the German philosopher Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) intensively in the 1930s: as he understood Husserl’s phenomenological method, it directed philosophers to attend closely to humans’ experience of the world, in order to describe “the phenomena” (the way the world appears to human consciousness) in rigorous detail.  In an early paper about Husserl published in 1939, Sartre’s excitement about this revolutionary method was palpable.  6 Along with two other German philosophers, Hegel and Heidegger, Husserl forms part of the trio—often referred to as the “three Hs”—with whom Sartre enters into dialogue at various points in BN, usually in order to argue for the advantages of his view over theirs.  As a fellow novelist-philosopher, Iris Murdoch was well placed to understand the appeal for Sartre—indeed, for anyone with literary ambitions—of Husserl’s descriptive philosophical methodology.  The often-quoted and highly evocative vignettes in BN (Pierre in the café, the woman on the date, the hiker who gives in to fatigue) show Sartre taking full advantage of the opportunity to indulge in the detailed and stylish elaboration of fictional characters and scenarios which, he thought, the phenomenological method provided.  And, some years later, when Murdoch came to downgrade her earlier opinion of Sartre, she produced a competing vignette of her own (featuring “M,” a mother, and “D,” her daughter-in-law) to illustrate her criticisms of Sartre (Murdoch 1970).  In America it took longer for serious interest in Sartre’s philosophy to become established: with a few exceptions, most philosophical discussion postdated and depended on Barnes’s translation.  7 This time lag seems also to have made it more difficult for Sartre’s ideas to get an unprejudiced hearing: by the late 1950s Sartre was often presented outside France as a lightweight celebrity whose philosophy did not deserve to be taken seriously outside café society.  Some of Sartre’s critical articles about American society (written after a visit in 1945) had been translated into English in the 1950s; his increasingly vocal political criticisms of the West had also made him enemies.  8 Apparently Hazel Barnes herself, before she had read any of Sartre’s philosophical work, had dismissed existentialism as a “fashionable philosophy of defeatism and despair” (Cannon 2008: 92).  The early reception of Sartre in the UK and the US was idiosyncratic in a number of ways.  First, Sartre was often presented as a moral philosopher and, accordingly, criticized from that perspective.  Both Murdoch and MacIntyre saw him this way, while, in the US, Marjorie Grene presented existentialism as a philosophy in which the central “virtue” was authenticity, a line of thought that was also taken up and criticized by Charles Taylor.  Alvin Plantinga’s hostile 1958 paper, “An Existentialist’s Ethics,” claimed Sartre’s account of freedom was incompatible with any genuine morality and interpreted Sartre as a moral nihilist.  From today’s standpoint, and with the benefits of closer attention to BN as well as historical hindsight, this focus seems misguided.  Sartre himself states explicitly at the end of BN (and in some important footnotes) that an adequate discussion of morality would have to appear in “a future work,” but he never succeeded in fulfilling that promise, although we have some idea of the evolution of his moral thinking from the posthumously published Notebooks for an Ethics (Sartre 1992).  9 This moral perspective may have been encouraged to some extent by Barnes; although she was aware of Sartre’s reticence in BN, her interest in Sartre was driven by her strong desire for a credible post-religious morality, a possibility she continued to explore in her academic writing.  Many commentators also “read back” into BN the optimistic moral ideas that Sartre had sketched out in EH, erroneously conflating these two texts.  More generally, the categories used within analytical philosophy and the tacitly accepted boundaries of the discipline have shaped the approach of anglophone philosophers to BN.  For example, it is probably because Freud is rarely included (outside France) within the philosophical curriculum that Sartre’s conception of existentialist psychoanalysis has largely been ignored, while, on the other hand, his account of bad faith is seen as a contribution to the debate within the philosophy of mind about self-deception, and his account of shame is assessed with reference to the skeptical “problem of other minds.” In her introduction to the 1965 edition of her translation, Barnes complained that this “piecemeal” attention to BN hindered readers’ understanding: One can no more understand Sartre’s view of freedom, for instance, without considering his peculiar view of consciousness than one can judge Plato’s doctrine that knowledge is recollection without relating it to the theory of ideas.  What critics usually fail to see is that Sartre is one of the very few twentieth century philosophers to present us with a total system.  10 The predominantly ahistorical outlook of analytical philosophy has also inflected the study of Sartre.  With a few exceptions, and in spite of Sartre’s frequent references to the three Hs, most anglophone commentators have said little about Sartre’s relations to these predecessors, or even about his place in the European post-Kantian tradition more broadly.  Work still remains to be done exploring Sartre’s relations not only to the three Hs but also to more shadowy figures behind the text, including Kierkegaard, Bergson, Leibniz, and the Stoics.  11 It is perhaps especially surprising that so little attention was given to Sartre’s relationship with Heidegger: after all, Heidegger was still alive when BN appeared and he predeceased Sartre by only four years.  12 In fact, Heidegger’s influence pervades BN, although Sartre does not always acknowledge it.  Heidegger’s example may be responsible for BN’s title (which can be seen as a response to Heidegger’s most famous philosophical work, Being and Time ), and is surely the reason for the mention of ontology in its subtitle.  Heidegger’s example must also have influenced Sartre’s decision to make nothingness into a central philosophical concept.  Sartre’s focus on man’s practical immersion in his everyday tasks, the choice of the activity of questioning as an investigative point of departure, and the redeployment of anguish within a new framework are also all indebted to Heidegger.  13 Despite this debt, most of Sartre’s reading of Heidegger appears to have been in French translation, and he relied heavily on a small anthology of extracts and essays translated by Henry Corbin and published in France in 1938 (Heidegger 1938).  Sartre borrowed the phrase “human-reality” ( la réalité humaine ) directly from Corbin (who had used it to translate Heidegger’s term Dasein ).  This “monstrous translation,” as Jacques Derrida famously described it a quarter of a century later (Derrida 1982b: 115), was subsequently held against Sartre.  In conjunction with other evidence (including, importantly, EH), this usage was thought to warrant dismissal of BN as a philosophy resting on outdated and unacceptable humanist premises.  The “anti-humanist” criticism was one among several lines of attack within a broader critical backlash against Sartre that was at its height in the 1960s and 1970s, in both France and the English-speaking world.  Feminist theory provided a different kind of opposition (about which more later).  Insofar as it involves Sartre, the so-called Humanism Debate begins in 1946 when Jean Beaufret (a French philosopher with an interest in German thought) wrote to Heidegger with the intention of reestablishing a dialogue between French and German philosophy after the disruption of the Second World War.  14 In EH, Sartre had cited Heidegger as a fellow existentialist, and Beaufret was effectively inviting Heidegger to respond.  Heidegger’s reply—published in an expanded version as the “Letter on Humanism” (Heidegger 1978b)—was disdainful.  (It did not help that almost two decades had elapsed since the publication of Being and Time and Heidegger’s philosophical focus had shifted.) Although Sartre is not extensively discussed in the “Letter,” Heidegger makes it clear that, in his view, Sartre is one of the many Western philosophers who have misconceived the proper task of thought.  Sartre’s focus in EH on (free) human action is, Heidegger suggests, superficial: instead, we should develop our thinking in a way that “lets itself be claimed by Being so that it can say the truth of Being” (194).  To do this, it is important to notice the resources of language and to reconceptualize our relationship with it.  Indeed, the first page of the “Letter” contains one of Heidegger’s most-quoted claims: “Language is the house of Being.  In its home man dwells” (Heidegger 1978b: 193).  Why does Heidegger reject “humanism”—at least as it is normally conceived? Although the “Letter” pursues several relevant lines of thought, the central claim is that the way the human being is interpreted throughout the history of humanism is insufficiently radical, and sets us on the wrong philosophical path.  For example the Greek view that a human is essentially a “rational animal” helps itself uncritically to a conception of “life” and locates humans among other animals in a way that conceals our difference (which does not consist, for Heidegger, in “rationality”).  Behind this criticism lies a more fundamental problem, namely that “every humanism is either grounded in a metaphysics or is itself made to be the ground of one.… Accordingly, every humanism is metaphysical” (Heidegger 1978b: 202).  Heidegger’s critique of metaphysics is an immense topic; for our purposes, the key idea to retain is Heidegger’s claim—which is taken up in Derrida’s philosophy—that the Western philosophical tradition has repeatedly determined being in terms of presence .  For Heidegger, humanism is complicit with this metaphysical tendency; in its Cartesian incarnation, for example, humans are characterized as thinking subjects to whom beings are made present (or “represented”) as objects.  Derrida elaborates the theme of the “metaphysics of presence” with particular reference to questions of linguistic meaning and reference (which had, by the late twentieth century, also become dominant in anglophone philosophy as well as in Continental Europe).  Had French thought taken a different path after Heidegger’s anti-Sartrean intervention, the question of humanism might have been forgotten.  But the massive impact of structuralism in virtually every branch of the human sciences in France in the 1960s resulted in a range of “antihumanist” theoretical proposals that were thought to be antithetical to Sartre’s earlier philosophy, by authors who were often explicitly critical of Sartre.  As its name suggests, structuralism’s basic insight is that the production of meaning—where this is broadly understood to include linguistic meaning, the meaning of literary texts, and the meaning of social practices—depends on preexisting and socially shared structures or systems that determine and delimit the signifying possibilities available to the people who inhabit them.  A host of famous French thinkers are associated with this paradigm, including Barthes, Foucault, Lévi-Strauss, Lacan, and Althusser.  15 Across these different fields of investigation, the structuralist model denies explanatory primacy to individual subjectivity, and emphasizes instead the often-quoted “decentering of the subject” and the “death of the author.” 16 Sartre was portrayed as an advocate of the individualist humanism held by this body of work to be untenable.  Of course a case can be, and has been, made in Sartre’s defense; champions have portrayed and promoted a “new Sartre.” It should also be noted that many of the French theorists who distanced themselves from Sartre were separated from him by only a few years in age: Sartre’s prominence in public life needed to be questioned if they were to displace him.  A further question, which some have answered affirmatively, is whether Sartre’s post-BN writings show him to be following a similar trajectory to the structuralist theorists in any case.  17 The feminist attacks on Sartre were largely independent of this debate, and arose as part of the wider feminist Zeitgeist in the second half of the twentieth century.  One strand of feminist discussion has been biographically centered, insofar as it examines Sartre’s relationship with Beauvoir and his intellectual debts to her through a feminist lens.  In this context, the relevance of BN is exhausted by the light it throws on these wider questions (whether, for example, it reveals Beauvoir’s influence).  For this reason, I will merely remind the reader that Sartre dedicated BN au Castor and move on.  18 The so-called second wave of feminism was at its height in the 1970s when two American scholars published an influential article, “Holes and Slime: Sexism in Sartre’s Psychoanalysis” (Collins and Pierce 1976).  Their purpose was to show that Sartre’s examples in BN of the “psychoanalysis of things” manifest a sexism that contradicts BN’s basic anti-essentialist standpoint.  In the passages they cite from Barnes’s translation, Sartre considers the significance of holes and slime.  19 “Slime,” he tells us, has a negative ontological meaning, insofar as it signifies a threat to consciousness, or an inversion of its central characteristics (lucidity, freedom, etc.).  Sartre describes the action of slime as “a moist and feminine sucking,” which is also “the revenge of the In-itself.  A sickly-sweet feminine revenge.…” Collins and Pierce’s objections to Sartre’s treatment of holes are less forceful, as Sartre mentions several types of hole (including non-corporeal ones).  Nonetheless, his suggestion that the vagina is “a mouth and a voracious mouth which devours the penis” did not please them.  One response to these criticisms, voiced by Barnes and other critics, points out that these damning passages do not play an important role in BN; it would be absurd to take them to be “gendering” Sartre’s ontology, i.e., to infer that the for-itself is implicitly male and the in-itself implicitly female throughout.  According to this defense, we ought to distinguish the (incidental) sexism of Sartre’s imagery from his central philosophical doctrines.  As Barnes conceded, “A full investigation of the linguistic codes in Sartre’s writing would reveal him to be a man comfortably ensconced in a world of male dominance” (Barnes 1990: 341).  But, Sartre’s supporters argued, we need to look beyond the regrettably sexist imagery and language in order to notice the emancipatory potential of Sartre’s basic anti-essentialism.  20 However, this defense of Sartre may not work in relation to another, more theoretically sophisticated line of feminist criticism.  According to the French philosopher Michèle Le Dœuff (2007), a philosophical “imaginary,” expressing a male outlook and male privilege, can be discerned within the Western philosophical canon as a whole and BN is no exception.  As this orientation is largely unconscious and surfaces most often in imagery or examples that may appear to be incidental, we cannot dismiss these aspects of a text.  One of Le Dœuff’s most compelling analyses focuses on Sartre’s depictions of women in his discussion of bad faith: not only the well-known woman on the date who tries not to notice her suitor’s sexual ambitions but also the unfortunate women, featured in some case studies from Stekel and cited by Sartre, who claim not to enjoy sex with their husbands, although both Stekel and Sartre disagree (Le Dœuff 2007: 64–68).  In her unconventional book, Le Dœuff also draws on a wide range of other materials, including Beauvoir’s memoirs and letters from Sartre, arguing that the real-life consequence of their intellectual partnership was effectively that Beauvoir was deprived (or deprived herself) of the status of a philosopher.  Genevieve Lloyd’s The Man of Reason , first published in 1984, also surveyed the Western philosophical canon from a feminist critical point of view, although through a slightly different lens (Lloyd 1993).  Lloyd claims that the ideal of reason is repeatedly associated in philosophy with maleness; this association, moreover, is sometimes “inherited” by philosophers who may not consciously appreciate its workings.  Lloyd argues that the idea of “transcendence” that Beauvoir took over from Sartre (and, via Sartre, from Hegel), and uses in The Second Sex , is contaminated in this way and therefore an unsuitable feminist ideal.  Le Dœuff’s and Lloyd’s books are insightful, and their remarks about BN deserve serious attention.  Still, we should note that the ambition and generality of these surveys mean that Sartre is seen to instantiate a rule rather than an exception.  In addition, these critics suggest that the bias they are documenting needs to be unearthed : it is not always obvious, and nor do the philosophers who exhibit it even necessarily intend it.  In this respect, these feminist interpretations of Western philosophy share some of the features of Derrida’s deconstructionist approach to philosophy, published in France in several influential books and articles in the late 1960s and 1970s.  21 Some of these writings target the structuralism that was then so fashionable in France: because of their deflationary effect, Derrida is often described as a “post-structuralist.” For Derrida there is something quixotic about the view that a signifying system can be mastered once its basic structures have been identified.  Derrida’s own writing focuses especially on the case of language: one of the features that makes his prose difficult to read (and even more difficult to translate) is the multiple “performances” of language eluding authorial control.  Puns, ambiguities, and neologisms abound in Derrida’s highly self-conscious texts.  Derrida’s ambitious and complicated project is difficult to sum up (in part because it deliberately resists presentation as a set of doctrines), but a few further remarks about his relationship to Sartre are called for.  As we saw, Derrida blames Sartre for using the term “human-reality” and, more broadly, for perpetuating a naïvely “anthropological” or humanist reading of Heidegger’s work (Derrida 1982b).  Nonetheless, the effect of Derrida’s wider analysis in this essay is ultimately to dilute Sartre’s specific accountability for the persistence of humanism in recent philosophy by showing, for example, that despite Heidegger’s stated intentions (in his “Letter” and elsewhere) there is a residual humanism in his thought too.  As Derrida puts it: What must hold our interest… is the kind of profound justification, whose necessity is subterranean, which makes the Hegelian, Husserlian and Heideggerian critiques or de-limitations of metaphysical humanism appear to belong to the very sphere of that which they criticize or de-limit.  (Derrida 1982b: 119) How does BN stand in relation to these more recent developments in French philosophy? Although the phenomenon of language is occasionally discussed, it is not at the center of Sartre’s concerns.  Moreover, despite occasional instances of linguistic playfulness in the text, Sartre’s style and tone exhibit a pre-Derridean confidence that language can be used to say what we mean that would not have been possible (or, at least, not without discussion) twenty-five years later.  The same confidence emerges in some of Sartre’s reflections on his own linguistic practice, as the following exchange, from an interview with Michel Contat in 1975, shows: Q: Your philosophical manuscripts are written in long hand, with almost no crossings out or erasures, while your literary manuscripts are very much worked over, perfected.  Why is there this difference? A : The objectives are different: in philosophy, every sentence should have only one meaning.  The work I did on Les Mots , for example, attempting to give multiple and superimposed meanings to each sentence, would be bad work in philosophy.  (Sartre 1978b: 7) But if Sartre’s attitude toward language in BN is old-fashioned, the proponents of the “new Sartre” have shown that in other respects, and sympathetically read, BN is ahead of its time.  The “humanist” criticisms voiced by Heidegger and the structuralists, for example, often draw on a simplifying interpretation of Sartre’s “Cartesian” standpoint in BN that can easily be shown to be incomplete.  22 For Descartes, the cogito affords the subject indubitable first personal knowledge, while mind and body are two separate substances which are, respectively, immaterial and material.  In Sartre’s hands, all these elements are radically modified: the reflective standpoint of the cogito is shown to be epistemologically unreliable; consciousness is not a substance and, in addition, it has no contents.  Moreover, Sartre’s characterization of the for-itself as being-what-it-is-not and not-being-what-it-is “decenters” the Sartrean subject, and undermines the possibility of self-coincidence in a way that, arguably, keeps the “metaphysics of presence” at bay.  23 Whatever its merits, the “new Sartre” exemplifies BN’s relevance to later French thought, enlisting it in a dialogue with more recent philosophy.  At the same time, academic philosophy in the English-speaking world, which typically resists European “fashion,” has come to accept BN as a classic text that belongs in the post-Kantian tradition.  I hope this new translation will help the reader to form her own view of it—for herself, responsibly and freely, as Sartre would have urged.  References Aquila, Richard E.  (1998), “Sartre’s Other and the Field of Consciousness: A ‘Husserlian’ Reading,” European Journal of Philosophy 6 (3): 253–276.  Ayer, A.J.  (1945), “Novelist-Philosopher, Jean-Paul Sartre,” Horizon 12 (67): 12–26 and 12 (68): 101–110.  Baiasu, Sorin (2011), Kant and Sartre: Re-discovering Critical Ethics (London: Palgrave Macmillan).  Bakewell, Sarah (2016), At the Existentialist Café (London: Vintage).  Baldwin, Thomas (1979), “The Original Choice in Sartre and Kant,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 80: 31–44.  Baldwin, Thomas (2007), “The Humanism Debate,” in Leiter and Rosen (eds.) (2007): 671–710.  Barnes, Hazel (1965), “Translator’s Introduction,” in Sartre (1965): viii–xliii.  Barnes, Hazel (1990), “Sartre and Sexism,” Philosophy and Literature 14 (2): 340–347.  Barnes, Hazel (1997), The Story I Tell Myself (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).  Beauvoir, Simone de (1999), America Day by Day , trans.  Carol Cosman (Berkeley: University of California Press).  Berlin, Isaiah (2009), Enlightening: Letters , 1946–60 , ed.  H.  Hardy and J.  Holmes (London: Chatto & Windus).  Cannon, Betty (2008), “Hazel E.  Barnes, 1915–2008: A Tribute and Farewell,” Sartre Studies International 14 (2): 90–103.  Caws, Peter (1992), “Sartrean Structuralism?” in Howells (ed.) (1992a): 293–317.  Collins, Margery, and Pierce, Christine (1976), “Holes and Slime: Sexism in Sartre’s Psychoanalysis,” in Gould and Wartofsky (eds.) (1976): 112–127.  Cumming, Robert Denoon (1991–2001), Phenomenology and Deconstruction (4 vols.) (Chicago: Chicago University Press).  Daigle, Christine, and Golomb, Jacob (eds.) (2008), Beauvoir and Sartre: The Riddle of Influence (Bloomington: Indiana University Press).  Derrida, Jacques (1982a), Margins of Philosophy , trans.  Alan Bass (Sussex: Harvester Press).  Derrida, Jacques (1982b), “The Ends of Man,” in Derrida (1982a): 109–136.  Desan, Wilfrid (1954), The Tragic Finale: An Essay on the Philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).  Edwards, Paul (ed.) (1967), The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (New York: Macmillan).  Farrell Fox, Nik (2003), The New Sartre (London: Continuum).  Foucault, Michel (1970), The Order of Things (London: Tavistock).  Fulton, Ann (1999), Apostles of Sartre: Existentialism in America , 1945–1963 (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).  Gardner, Sebastian (2005), “Sartre, Intersubjectivity, and German Idealism,” Journal of the History of Philosophy 43 (3): 325–351.  Gardner, Sebastian (2009), Sartre’s Being and Nothingness (London: Continuum).  Gould, Carol, and Wartofsky, Marx (eds.) (1976), Women and Philosophy: Toward a Theory of Liberation (New York: G.  P.  Putnam’s Sons).  Gutting, Gary (2001), French Philosophy in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Hampshire, Stuart (1957), “Sartre the Philosopher,” The Observer (London), May 12.  Hartmann, Klaus (1966), Sartre’s Ontology (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).  Heidegger, Martin (1938), Qu’est-ce que la Métaphysique? Suivi d’Extraits sur l’Être et le Temps et d’une Conference sur Hölderlin , trans.  Henry Corbin (Paris: Gallimard).  Heidegger, Martin (1978a), Basic Writings , trans.  David Krell (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).  Heidegger, Martin (1978b), “Letter on Humanism,” trans.  David Krell, in Heidegger (1978a): 193–242.  Hopkins, Robert (1998), Picture, Image and Experience (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).  Howells, Christina (ed.) (1992a), The Cambridge Companion to Sartre (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).  Howells, Christina (1992b), “Sartre and the Deconstruction of the Subject,” in Howells (ed.) (1992a): 318–352.  Le Dœuff, Michèle (2007), Hipparchia’s Choice , trans.  Trista Selous (New York: Columbia University Press).  Leiter, B., and Rosen, M.  (eds) (2007), The Oxford Handbook of Continental Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Lloyd, Genevieve (1993), The Man of Reason (London: Routledge).  MacIntyre, Alasdair (1967), “Existentialism,” in Edwards (ed.) (1967), Vol.  3: 147–154.  Marcuse, Herbert (1947), “Existentialism: Remarks on Jean-Paul Sartre’s L’Être et le Néant ,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 8 (3): 309–336.  Murdoch, Iris (1967), Sartre (London: Fontana).  Murdoch, Iris (1970), The Sovereignty of Good (New York: Schocken Books).  Murphy, Julien (ed.) (1999), Feminist Interpretations of Jean-Paul Sartre (University Park: Pennsylvania University Press).  Plantinga, Alvin (1958), “An Existentialist’s Ethics,” Review of Metaphysics 12 (2): 235–256.  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1943), L’Être et le Néant (Paris: Gallimard).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1965), Being and Nothingness , trans.  and introduced by Hazel Barnes (New York: Washington Square Press).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1970), “Intentionality: A Fundamental Idea of Husserl’s Phenomenology,” trans.  Joseph Fell, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 1 (2): 4–5.  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1973), Existentialism and Humanism , trans.  Philip Mairet (London: Methuen).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1978a), Sartre in the Seventies: Interviews and Essays , trans.  Paul Auster and Lydia Davis (London: Andre Deutsch).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1978b), “Self-Portrait at Seventy,” reprinted in Sartre (1978a): 4–92.  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1992), Notebooks for an Ethics , trans.  David Pellauer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).  Schilpp, P.  A.  (ed.) (1981), The Philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre (La Salle, IL: Open Court).  Simont, Juliette (1998), Jean-Paul Sartre: Un Demi-siècle de Liberté (Brussels: De Boeck).  Warnock, Mary (ed.) (1971), Sartre: A Collection of Critical Essays (New York: Anchor Books).  Part Three: Being-for-the-Other Part Three GT257 Being-for-the-Other Note on Abbreviations N OTE ON A BBREVIATIONS BN Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness (unless otherwise stated, reference is to the present translation).  EN Jean-Paul Sartre (1943), L’Être et le Néant (Paris: Gallimard) (i.e., the original French text of Being and Nothingness ).  EH Jean-Paul Sartre (1973), Existentialism and Humanism , trans.  Philip Mairet (London: Methuen).  Note : The numbers in superscript at the start of each chapter (e.g., GT9) correspond to the pagination in the Gallimard Collection Tel edition of L’Être et le Néant , as published in 1976.  Footnotes : In the present translation, Sartre’s notes have been labeled “Sartre’s note” and those written by the translator labeled “TN”(Translator’s Note).  Part One: The Problem of Nothingness Part One GT35 The problem of nothingness Chapter 1: Being and Doing: Freedom Chapter 1 GT477 BEING AND DOING Freedom I.  THE FIRST CONDITION OF ACTION IS FREEDOM It is strange that the arguments about determinism and free will have endlessly continued, with examples being cited in favor of one or the other claim, without any preliminary attempt being made to explicate the structures contained within the very idea of action .  In fact, the concept of an act contains numerous subordinate notions, which we need to organize and place within a hierarchy: to act is to modify the way the world is figured , to arrange the means in view of an end; it is to produce an organized, instrumental structure such that, through a series of sequences and connections, the modification brought about in one of the links brings in its wake modifications in the entire series and, in the end, produces some foreseen result.  Still, that is not the most important point.  The point we should note at the outset is that an action is, by definition, intentional .  The clumsy smoker who inadvertently blows up a powder keg has not acted .  In contrast, the worker charged with dynamiting a quarry, and who has obeyed the orders he was given, has acted when he has set off the anticipated explosion: he knew, in effect, what he was doing or—alternatively—he was intentionally actualizing a conscious project.  That does not imply, of course, that we must foresee every consequence of our acts: the emperor Constantine did not foresee, when he established himself in Byzantium, that he was creating a city of Greek language and culture whose appearance would ultimately provoke a schism within the Christian Church and would contribute to the decline of the Roman Empire.  Yet, to the extent that he fulfilled his project of creating a new residence for the emperors in the Orient, he performed an act.  Here the adequation of the result to the intention is sufficient to allow us to talk of action.  But, if that is correct, we may observe that an action necessarily implies, as its condition, some recognized “desideratum,” i.e., an objective lack or even a negatity.  The intention to create a rival to Rome can come to Constantine only through his apprehension of an objective lack: Rome lacks a counterweight; to this town, still deeply pagan, it is necessary to oppose a Christian city that, for now, is missing .  The creation of Constantinople can be understood as an act only if, first, the conception of a new town preceded the action itself or if, at the least, this conception functions as the organizing theme of all the subsequent steps.  But this conception cannot just be a representation of the town as possible .  It grasps the town in its essential characteristic, as a possible that is desirable and not achieved.  In other words, from the moment the act is conceived, consciousness has been able to withdraw from the full world of which it is conscious and to leave the terrain of being, in order openly to approach that of non-being.  As long as consciousness is considering what is, and considering that exclusively in its being, it will be constantly referred from being to being, and it will be unable to find any ground within being to motivate a discovery of non-being.  The imperial system, insofar as Rome is its capital, works positively and in some specific real manner that can easily be disclosed.  Might it be said that tax returns are low, that Rome is not sheltered from invasions, that it doesn’t have the right geographical situation for the capital of a Mediterranean empire under threat from barbarians, that the corrupted moral attitudes there make it difficult for the Christian religion to spread? How can we fail to see that all these considerations are negative , i.e., that their target is what is not, and not what is? To say that 60 percent of the anticipated taxes have been collected might pass, at a stretch, for a positive appreciation of the situation as it is .  To say that the returns are low is to consider the situation through a situation that is posited as an absolute end and which, precisely, is not .  To say that the corrupted moral attitudes there hinder the spread of Christianity is not to consider that expansion for what it is, as a process of propagation whose rate we are able to determine by means of the ecclesiastics’ reports: it is to posit it as being insufficient in itself, i.e., as suffering a secret nothingness.  But of course it appears like that only if we surpass it toward a limit-situation that is posited a priori as valuable—for example, toward a specific rate of religious conversions, a specific popular morality—and this limit-situation cannot be conceived merely on the basis of a consideration of the real state of things, because the most beautiful girl in the world can only give us what she has and, likewise, the most wretched situation can only, by itself, be designated as what it is , without any reference to an ideal nothingness.  Insofar as man is immersed within his historical situation, he may not even conceive of the defects and lacks within a particular political or economic organization, not because (as people foolishly say) he “is used to it,” but because he grasps it in its plenitude of being and he cannot even imagine that it might be otherwise.  We must reverse common opinion here, and accept that it is not the harshness of a situation, or the sufferings it imposes, which provide the grounds for conceiving of another state of things in which everyone would do better; on the contrary, it is on the day when we become able to conceive of another state of things that a new light is thrown on our hardships and our sufferings, and we decide that they are intolerable.  The worker in 1830 is capable of revolt if salaries are reduced, because he can easily conceive of a situation in which his wretched standard of living would nonetheless be higher than the one which others intend to impose on him.  But he does not represent his sufferings as intolerable; he puts up with them, not through resignation but because he lacks the culture and reflection necessary for him to conceive of a social condition in which these sufferings would not exist.  Thus he does not act .  Having taken command of Lyon after a riot, the workers of the Croix-Rousse do not know what to do with their victory; disoriented, they go back home, and the regular army finds them without difficulty.  1 Their misfortunes do not seem to them “habitual” but natural : they are , that is all, and they constitute the worker’s condition; they do not stand out, they are not seen in clear light, and, in consequence, the worker integrates them within his being; he suffers without considering his suffering and without bestowing value on it.  For the worker, to suffer and to be amount to the same thing; his suffering is the pure affective content of his non-positional consciousness, but he does not contemplate it.  It cannot therefore be, on its own, a motive for his actions.  Rather, quite to the contrary, it will appear to him as intolerable when he has formed the project to change it.  That means he will have had to take a distance, or step back, from it and to have performed a twofold nihilation: on the one hand, he will have to posit an ideal state of things as a pure nothingness in the present ; on the other hand, he will have to posit the current situation as a nothingness in relation to this state of things.  He will have to conceive of a state of happiness associated with his class as a pure possible, i.e., as a certain nothingness at present; on the other hand, he will return to the present situation in order to see it in the light of this nothingness, and to nihilate it in its turn, by asserting: “I am not happy.” From this, two important consequences follow: (1) No factual state, whatever it is (a political or economic structure of society, a psychological “state,” etc.), is capable of motivating any action by itself.  That is because an action is a projection of the for-itself toward what is not, and nothing that is can ever determine by itself what is not.  (2) No factual state can determine consciousness to apprehend it as a negatity or a lack.  Better still, no factual state can determine consciousness to define it and delimit it, since, as we saw, Spinoza’s phrase “ Omnis determinatio est negatio ” remains profoundly true.  2 Now, it is an explicit condition of every action not only that a state of things be disclosed as “a lack of…” (i.e., as a negatity) but in addition—and antecedently—that the state of things under consideration should be constituted into an isolated system.  There is no factual state—satisfactory or not—other than through the for-itself’s nihilating power.  But this nihilating power cannot be limited to a mere withdrawal in relation to the world.  Indeed, insofar as consciousness is “invested” by being, insofar as it simply suffers what is, it must be subsumed within being: it is necessary to surmount and negate the organized figure “worker-who-finds-his-suffering-natural” for it to be able to become the object of a revelatory contemplation.  This means, of course, that it is purely by means of his separating from himself—and from the world—that the worker is able to posit his suffering as an intolerable suffering and in consequence to make it the motive of his revolutionary action.  That implies, therefore, the permanent possibility for consciousness of making a break with its own past, of separating itself from it, in order to be able to consider it in the light of a non-being and to be able to confer on it the meaning that it has on the basis of a projected meaning that it has not .  There is no circumstance or way in which the past on its own can give rise to an act , i.e., the positing of an end, in whose light, thrown back on it, it is seen.  This is what Hegel glimpsed when he wrote that “the spirit is the negative,” even though he seems not to have remembered it when he came to set out his own theory of action and of freedom.  3 In fact, once we attribute to consciousness this negative power in relation to the world and itself, once nihilation becomes an integral part of the positing of an end, we have to acknowledge—as the indispensable and fundamental condition of any action—the freedom of the being who acts.  Thus we are able to grasp from the outset what is missing from those tedious arguments between determinists and the partisans of the freedom of indifference.  4 The latter are concerned to find instances of decision where no previous reason exists, or deliberations in relation to two opposed actions that are equally possible and for which the grounds (and the motives) have exactly the same weight.  In response, it is easy for the determinists to say that there is no action without a reason, and that the most insignificant movement (raising one’s right hand rather than one’s left hand, etc.) refers us to reasons and motives that confer its meaning on it.  It could not be otherwise, since any action must be intentional : in effect, it must have an end, and the end, in its turn, will refer to a reason.  Indeed, that is the character of the unity of the three temporal ecstases: the end, or the temporalization of my future, implies a reason (or a motive), i.e., it points toward my past, and the present is the arising of my act.  To talk of an act without a reason is to talk of an act that lacks the intentional structure of all action, and the partisans of freedom, by seeking it at the level of the act’s very performance, only manage to make freedom seem absurd.  But the determinists in their turn let themselves off the hook by stopping their investigation at the mere labeling of “reason” and “motive.” The essential question, in effect, lies beyond the complex organization of “reason-intention-act-end”: in fact, we ought to ask how a reason (or a motive) can be constituted as such.  Now, we have just seen that, if no act occurs without a reason, that is not at all in the sense in which we might say that no phenomenon occurs without a cause.  Indeed, in order to be a reason, the reason must be experienced as such.  Of course, that does not mean that it must be thematically conceived of and explicated in any way, as in the case of deliberation.  But it does at least mean that the for-itself has to confer on it the value of a motive or reason.  And, as we have just seen, this constitution of the reason as such cannot refer back to another real and positive existent, i.e., to an earlier reason.  Otherwise the very nature of the act, as intentionally engaged within non-being, would vanish.  The motive can be understood only through the end, i.e., something nonexistent; the motive is therefore in itself a negatity .  If I agree to be paid a pittance, it is probably out of fear—and fear is a motive.  But it is fear of dying of hunger , and so the only meaning to this fear lies outside it, in an ideally posited end: the preservation of a life that I grasp as “endangered.” And this fear in its turn can be understood only in relation to the value that I implicitly place on this life, i.e., it refers to that hierarchical system of ideal objects in which values consist.  In this way, the motive comes to learn what it is through the set of beings that “are not,” through ideal existences and through the future.  In the same way as the future returns to the present and the past to illuminate it, so my projects as a whole turn back to confer on the motive its structure as a motive.  It is only because I escape the in-itself by nihilating myself in the direction of my possibilities that this in-itself is able to acquire the value of a reason or a motive.  Reasons and motives have meaning only within a pro-jected set that is precisely a set of nonexistents.  And, in the end, this set is myself as a transcendence; it is me insofar as I have myself to be, outside myself.  If we recall the principle we recently established—namely, that it is the apprehension of a revolution as possible that confers on the worker’s suffering the value of a motive—we are obliged to conclude from it that it is by fleeing a situation in the direction of our possibility of modifying it that we organize that situation into a structure of reasons and motives.  The nihilation through which we take a step back in relation to the situation, and the ecstasis through which we pro-ject ourselves toward a modification of this situation are one and the same.  The result is that it is indeed impossible to find an act without a motive, but we should not conclude that the motive is the cause of the act: it is an integral part of it.  Indeed, and as we cannot distinguish the project that has resolved on a change from the act, the motive, the act, and the end are constituted in one single arising.  The meaning of each of these three structures calls for the other two.  But the organized totality of the three cannot further be explained by any particular structure, and its arising as a pure temporalizing nihilation of the in-itself is one and the same as freedom.  It is the act that determines its ends and its motives, and the act is the expression of freedom.  However, we cannot stop at these superficial considerations: if freedom is the fundamental condition of any act, we must attempt to describe freedom more precisely.  But we will encounter a great difficulty at the start: description, usually, is an activity of explication, focusing on the structures of a particular essence.  But freedom has no essence.  It is not subject to any logical necessity; we should say in relation to it what Heidegger says of Dasein in general: “In it, existence precedes and commands essence.” 5 Freedom is made into action, and we usually make contact with it through the act that it organizes, with the reasons, motives, and ends that it implies.  But precisely because this act has an essence, it appears to us as constituted ; if we want to get back to the constitutive power, we will have to abandon all hope of finding any essence for it.  Such an essence would require, in fact, a new constitutive power, and so on, up to infinity.  How, then, are we to describe an existence that is constantly making itself and which refuses to be contained within a definition? Even the designation “freedom” is dangerous if that suggests that the word refers to a concept, as words usually do.  Indefinable and unnameable, will freedom not be indescribable? We encountered similar difficulties when we wanted to describe the being of the phenomenon, and nothingness.  These difficulties did not stop us, since there can be descriptions that do not aim at the essence but at the existent itself, in its particularity.  Of course I am not able to describe a freedom that is common to myself and the other; I am not able therefore to envisage an essence of freedom.  On the contrary, it is freedom that is the foundation of all essences, since it is by surpassing the world toward his own possibilities that man discloses intraworldly essences.  But what we are dealing with is my freedom.  Similarly, when I described consciousness, it was not a matter of some nature that certain individuals have in common but rather of my particular consciousness, which, like my freedom, is beyond any essence or—as we have shown several times—for which to be is to have been.  To reach this consciousness in its very existence, I was able to avail myself precisely of a particular experience: the cogito .  As Gaston Berger has shown, 6 Husserl and Descartes ask the cogito to deliver up a truth about essence : in the one case we will reach the connection between two simple natures, while, in the other, we will grasp the eidetic structure of consciousness.  But if consciousness must in its existence precede its essence, both of them have made a mistake.  All we can ask of the cogito is that it acquaint us with a factual necessity.  We will also turn to the cogito in order to determine freedom as a freedom that is ours , as a pure factual necessity, i.e., as an existent that is contingent but that I cannot fail to experience.  I am indeed an existent who learns of his freedom through his acts—but I am also an existent whose individual and unique existence temporalizes itself as freedom.  As such I am necessarily a consciousness (of) freedom, since nothing exists in consciousness except as a non-thetic consciousness of existing.  In this way my freedom is constantly in question in my being: it is not a quality that is added on, or a property of my nature; it is, to be exact, the fabric of my being; and as my being is in question in my being, I must necessarily possess a certain understanding of freedom.  It is this understanding that it is our intention, now, to explicate.  To reach the core of freedom, we may be helped by the various observations that we ought at this point to summarize.  We established in our first chapter that, if negation comes to the world through human-reality, this latter must be a being that is able to actualize a nihilating break with the world and with itself; and we had established that the permanent possibility of this break and freedom are just one and the same.  But, on the other hand, we had noted that this permanent possibility of nihilating what I am—in the form of “having-been” it—implies that man has a particular type of existence.  We were able then to determine, on the basis of analyses such as that of bad faith, that human-reality was its own nothingness.  To be, for the for-itself, is to nihilate the in-itself that it is.  In these conditions, freedom can be nothing other than this nihilation.  Through it, the for-itself escapes from its being, as from its essence; through it, the for-itself is always something other than what we can say about it, because it is at the least that which escapes this very naming, which is always beyond the name we give to it, beyond the property we acknowledge it to have.  To say that the for-itself has to be what it is, to say that it is what it is not by not being what it is, and to say that existence precedes and conditions its essence, or vice versa, and according to Hegel’s formula, that in its case “ Wesen ist was gewesen ist ,” 7 is to say one and the same thing: namely, that man is free.  By the mere fact, indeed, that I am conscious of the reasons that solicit my action, these reasons are already transcendent objects for my consciousness; they are outside.  I may try in vain to cling on to them; by my very existence I escape them.  I am condemned to exist forever beyond my essence, beyond the motives and reasons for my action: I am condemned to be free.  In other words, we cannot find any limits to my freedom other than itself or, alternatively, that we are not free to cease to be free.  To the extent that the for-itself wants to conceal its own nothingness from itself and to incorporate the in-itself as its true mode of being, it attempts at the same time to conceal its freedom from itself.  The innermost meaning of determinism is to establish within us an unfailing continuity of existence in itself.  In the determinist outlook, the motive, conceived as a psychological fact—i.e., as a full, given reality—is articulated, without any break in continuity, with the decision and the act, which are conceived, equally, as psychological givens.  The in-itself has taken hold of all of these “data”: the motive provokes the act as a cause provokes its effect; everything is real; everything is full.  Thus, the rejection of freedom can be conceived only as an attempt to apprehend oneself as being-in-itself; these go hand in hand with each other; human-reality is a being whose freedom is at stake in its being, because it tries constantly to refuse to recognize it.  Psychologically, in each one of us, that amounts to trying to take motives and reasons as things .  We try to lend them permanence; we do not face up to the fact that at each moment their nature and weight depend on the meaning I give to them, and we regard them as constants.  In other words, I consider the meaning that I gave them just now or yesterday—a meaning which, because it is past, is irremediable—and I generalize from its frozen character right into the present.  I try to persuade myself that my reason is as it was .  As such, my reason could pass, in its entirety, from my past consciousness into my present consciousness: it would inhabit it.  In other words, I attempt to give the for-itself an essence.  Similarly, we may posit our ends as if they were transcendences, which is not a mistake.  But rather than seeing them as transcendences that are posited and maintained in their being by my own transcendence, we suppose that I encounter them as I arise in the world: they come from God, from nature, from “my” nature, from society.  These ready-made and pre-human ends will therefore define the meaning of my act even before I conceive of it, just as my reasons—as pure psychological givens—will give rise to my act without my even noticing.  Reason, act, and end constitute a “continuum,” something full .  These abortive attempts to stifle freedom beneath the weight of freedom—they collapse when anguish in the face of freedom suddenly arises—are sufficient to show that, basically, freedom coincides with the nothingness that lies at man’s heart.  It is because human-reality is not enough that it is free, because it is constantly separated from itself, and because a nothingness separates what it has been from what it is, and from what it will be.  In short, it is because its present being is itself a nihilation in the form of a “reflection-reflecting.” Man is free because he is not an itself but self-presence.  8 A being that is what it is cannot be free.  Freedom is precisely the nothingness that is been at the heart of man and which obliges human-reality to make itself , rather than to be .  As we have seen, for human-reality to be is to choose itself : nothing comes along from outside—or from inside, either—for it to receive or accept .  Human-reality is entirely abandoned, without help of any kind, to the unbearable necessity of making itself be, right down to the last detail.  In this way freedom is not a being: it is man’s being, i.e., his nothingness of being.  If we conceived man in the first instance as a fullness, it would be absurd to seek afterward within him for moments or psychological regions where he might be free: we might as well look for a gap inside a container that we have previously filled right up to the rim.  Man cannot be sometimes free and sometimes a slave: he is free in his entirety and always, or he is not.  These remarks can lead us, if we know how to make use of them, to new discoveries.  They will enable us in the first place to clarify freedom’s relations with what we refer to as the “will.” A fairly widespread tendency aims in fact to equate free actions with voluntary actions, and to reserve determinist explanation for the world of passions.  That is basically Descartes’s point of view.  The Cartesian will is free, but there are “passions of the soul.” 9 In addition, Descartes attempts to interpret these passions in physiological terms.  Later, an attempt will be made to establish a purely psychological determinism.  The intellectualist analyses that someone like Proust, for example, tried to provide for jealousy or for snobbery may serve to illustrate this conception of a “mechanism” of the passions.  We are required then to conceive of man as free and at the same time determined; and the essential problem would be the relations between this unconditioned freedom and the determined processes of psychological life: How will freedom dominate the passions? How can it use them to its advantage? A wisdom from afar—Stoic wisdom—teaches us that to dominate the passions we should compromise with them; in short, we are advised to behave in relation to affectivity as man acts in relation to nature in general, when he obeys it in order better to command it.  Human-reality appears therefore as a free power that is besieged by a collection of determined processes.  We can distinguish between acts that are entirely free, determined processes over which the free will has power, and processes that necessarily escape the human-will.  We can see that such a conception is wholly unacceptable.  But let us try to understand our reasons for rejecting it better.  There is one objection that goes without saying and which we will not waste time expanding: that a clear-cut duality of this kind is inconceivable within the unity of the psyche.  How indeed are we to conceive of a being that is one and yet which, on the one hand, is constituted as a series of facts, each of which determines the others and which are, in consequence, existents in externality and, on the other hand, as a spontaneity determining itself to be and falling only under its own jurisdiction? A priori , this spontaneity would not be capable of any action over a determinism that was already constituted : On what could it act? On the object itself (the present psychological fact)? But how could it modify an in-itself that, by definition, is only and can only be what it is? On the law that itself governs the process? But whether we act on the present psychological fact in order to modify it in itself, or we act on it in order to modify its consequences, it amounts to the same.  And, in both cases, we encounter the same impossibility that we pointed out earlier.  Moreover, what instrument would be available to this spontaneity? If a hand is able to take something, it is because it can be taken.  Since spontaneity is by definition out of reach , it cannot in its turn reach anything: it can only produce itself.  And if it were to make use of some special instrument, we would have to conceive of its nature as intermediate between the free will and the determined passions, which is not acceptable.  Conversely, of course, the passions cannot have any hold over the will.  It is in fact impossible for a determined process to act on a spontaneity, in just the way that it is impossible for objects to act on consciousness.  Thus any synthesis of the two types of existents is impossible: they are not homogeneous, and they will each remain in their incommunicable solitude.  The only connection that a nihilating spontaneity could have with mechanical processes is to produce itself, by itself, through an internal negation on the basis of these existents .  But then, precisely, it will only be insofar as it denies, in relation to itself, that it is these passions.  Thenceforth, spontaneity will necessarily grasp the determinate πάθος in its entirety as a pure transcendent, i.e., as something that is necessarily outside , as something that it is not .  The only effect therefore of this internal negation would be to found the πάθος within the world and it would exist—like any object in the midst of the world—for a free spontaneity that is at the same time both consciousness and will.  10 This discussion shows that two solutions, and only two, are possible: either man is entirely determined (which is inadmissible, especially because a consciousness that is determined—i.e., motivated externally—becomes a pure externality itself, and ceases to be a consciousness) or, indeed, man is entirely free.  But these remarks are not yet what, for us, is especially important.  Their impact is only negative.  The examination of the will must enable us, on the contrary, to move forward in our understanding of freedom.  And that is why what strikes us in the first instance is that, if the will is to be autonomous, it is impossible to regard it as a psychological fact that is given , i.e., in-itself.  It cannot belong to the category of “states of consciousness” defined by the psychologist.  Here, as everywhere else, we hold that the state of consciousness is simply an idol of positivist psychology.  The will, if it is to be a freedom, is necessarily a negativity and a power of nihilation.  But in that case we can no longer see why we should reserve autonomy for it.  In fact we have trouble in conceiving of these holes of nihilation that volitions are supposed to be, which are thought to arise within the fabric—a fabric that is dense and full—of passions and of πάθος in general.  If the will is nihilation, the whole of the psyche must likewise be nihilation.  Besides—and we will shortly return to this—where do we get the idea that a passionate “event” and a pure and simple desire are not nihilations? Is passion not in the first place a project and an enterprise, does it not precisely posit a state of things as being intolerable, and is it not thereby obliged to withdraw from that and to nihilate it by isolating it and considering it in the light of an end, i.e., of a non-being? And doesn’t passion have its own ends, which are recognized precisely in the very moment in which it posits them as nonexistent? And if nihilation is precisely freedom’s being, how can we deny autonomy to the passions, in order to grant it to the will? But there is more to be said: far from it being the case that the will is the unique or, at least, the supreme manifestation of freedom, it requires on the contrary—like any event of the for-itself—the foundation of an original freedom in order to constitute itself as the will.  In effect, the will posits itself as a reflective decision in relation to certain ends.  But it does not create these ends.  Rather, it is a way of being in relation to these ends: it decrees that the pursuit of these ends will be reflective and deliberative.  Passion may posit the same ends.  In the face of a threat, for example, I may take to my heels, fearful of dying.  In this passionate event, the value of life is not any the less implicitly posited as a supreme end.  Someone else may understand, on the contrary, that he should stay where he is, even if resistance seems to him at first to be more dangerous than flight; he “holds out.” But his aim, even though it is better understood and explicitly posited, remains the same as in the case of the emotional reaction.  Only the means of attaining it are more clearly conceived; some of them are rejected as doubtful or inefficacious, while others are organized more solidly.  Here the difference turns on the choice of means and on the degree of reflection and explication, and not on the end.  Yet the runaway is said to be “impassioned,” and we reserve the term “self-willed” for the man who resists.  11 What we have here therefore is a difference in the subjective attitude in relation to a transcendent end.  But if we do not want to fall into the error that we were denouncing earlier, and to regard these transcendent ends as pre-human and as an a priori limit to our transcendence, we are wholly obliged to acknowledge them to be the temporalizing projection of our freedom.  As we have seen, human-reality cannot receive its ends, either from outside or from a supposed inner “nature.” It chooses them and, through this very choice, confers upon them a transcendent existence as the external limit of its projects.  From this point of view—and if we fully grasp that Dasein ’s existence precedes and commands its essence—human-reality, in and through its very arising, decides to define its own being through its ends.  My being is therefore characterized by my positing of my ultimate ends, which can be identified with the initial bursting forth of the freedom that is mine.  And it is an existence that bursts forth; it is nothing like an essence or a property of a being, i.e., something engendered in conjunction with an idea.  In this way freedom, being equivalent to existence, is the foundation of the ends that I will try to accomplish either through my will or through my impassioned efforts.  We cannot therefore limit it to voluntary acts.  On the contrary, volitions are, like passions, specific subjective attitudes through which we try to accomplish the ends that our original freedom posits.  We should not, of course, construe “original freedom” as a freedom that might exist before the voluntary or impassioned action but rather as a foundation that is strictly contemporary with the will or the passion and that each of these latter manifests in its own way.  Nor should we oppose freedom to the will or to passion in the way in which Bergson’s “deep-seated self” is opposed to the superficial self: the for-itself is entirely ipseity and cannot have any “deep-seated self”—unless we understand by that certain transcendent structures of the psyche.  Freedom is nothing other than the existence of our will and our passions, insofar as this existence is a nihilation of facticity, i.e., the existence of a being that is its being in the mode of having to be it.  We will return to this.  Let us remember in any case that the will determines itself within the framework of motives and ends that the for-itself has already posited in a transcendent project of itself toward its possibles.  If this were not the case, how could we understand deliberation, which involves an assessment of means in relation to ends that already exist? If these ends are already established, what remains to be decided at every instant is the way that I will behave in relation to them—in other words, the attitude I will take up.  Will I act in accordance with my will or my passions? Who can decide this, other than me? If in fact we were to allow that circumstances make the decision for me (for example, I might exercise my will where the danger is small, but if the risk grows I topple into passion), we thereby remove freedom altogether: indeed, it would be absurd to assert that the will is autonomous when it appears, but that external circumstances strictly determine the moment of its appearing.  But on the other hand how can we defend the idea that a will which is not yet in existence could suddenly decide to break the chain of passions and suddenly arise on the ruins of that chain? Such an account would lead us to regard the will as a power that is sometimes manifest to consciousness and sometimes remains hidden, but which in any case possesses the “in-itself” existence and permanence of a property.  That is exactly what we cannot allow: however, it is certain that ordinary opinion does conceive of the moral life as a struggle between a will-thing and some passions-substances.  What we see there is a kind of psychological Manichaeism that is utterly indefensible.  In fact, it is not enough to will something: one must will to will it.  Take for example a given situation: I may react to it emotionally.  We have shown elsewhere that emotion is not a physiological thunderstorm: 12 it is a response adapted to the situation; it is a mode of behavior whose meaning and form are the object of an intention belonging to consciousness which aims to accomplish a particular end by some particular means.  In a state of fear, fainting and cataplexy aim to eliminate the danger by eliminating our consciousness of the danger.  There is an intention to lose consciousness in order to abolish the fearsome world in which consciousness is committed, and through which it comes to being.  We are dealing therefore with magical ways of behaving which induce symbolic fulfillments of our desires and which reveal, at the same time, a magical stratum of the world.  In opposition to these ways of behaving, behavior of the voluntary and rational type envisages the situation in technical terms, rejects magic, and concentrates on grasping the determined series and instrumental structures by which the problems may be resolved.  It will organize a structure of means, taking instrumental determinism as its basis.  As a result, it will uncover a technical world, i.e., a world in which each equipment-structure refers to another wider structure, and so on.  But who will decide whether I choose the magical or the technical aspect of the world? It cannot be the world itself—which, in order to become manifest, waits upon its discovery.  The for-itself must therefore, in its project, choose to be the one through whom the world is disclosed as magical or rational, which is to say that it must give itself, as a free project of itself, a magical existence or a rational existence.  It is responsible for the one as for the other, for only if it has chosen itself can it be.  It appears therefore as the free foundation of its emotions, as of its volitions.  My fear is free and manifests my freedom: I have placed all my freedom into my fear and I choose myself as fearful in this circumstance or that; in some other circumstance I will exist as self-willed and courageous and I will have placed all my freedom into my courage.  In relation to freedom, no psychological phenomenon is favored.  All my “ways of being” manifest it equally, since they are all ways of being my own nothingness.  This will show up even better in a description of what we know as the “reasons and motives” of action.  We have sketched this description in the preceding pages: now is the time to return to it and resume it with more precision.  Do we not say, in effect, that the passion is the motive for the act—or even that the act of passion is the one that has passion as its motive? And doesn’t the will appear to be the decision that follows a deliberation about our motives and our reasons? What, then, is a reason? What is a motive? We normally take “reason” to mean the reason for an act, 13 i.e., the set of rational considerations that justify it.  If the government decides to convert its securities, it will give its reasons : to reduce public debt, to stabilize the Treasury.  Equally, it is in terms of reasons that historians habitually explain the actions of ministers or monarchs.  For a declaration of war, reasons will be sought: the moment is right; the country being attacked is broken apart by internal disturbances; it is time to put an end to an economic conflict that is in danger of dragging on.  If Clovis converts to Catholicism when so many barbarian kings are Arians, it is because he sees in it an opportunity to win favor with the episcopate, which is all-powerful in Gaul, etc.  We may note that a reason is hereby characterized as an objective assessment of the situation.  The reason for Clovis’s conversion is the political and religious state of Gaul, the balance of power between the episcopate, the major landowners and the common people; the state of the public debt is the motive for the conversion of securities.  However, this objective assessment can be made only in the light of a presupposed end and within the limits of a for-itself’s project toward this end.  For the power of the episcopate to be revealed to Clovis as a reason for conversion—i.e., for him to be able to consider the objective consequences that this conversion might have—he must already have posited the conquest of Gaul as an end.  If we suppose that Clovis has other ends, he might find reasons in the situation of the episcopate for becoming an Arian or remaining a pagan.  He might even find that his examination of the state of the Church provides no reason for acting in any particular way: then, in relation to this subject, there is nothing for him to discover; he will leave the situation of the episcopate “not-disclosed,” in complete obscurity.  What we will call a “reason,” therefore, is the objective grasp of a determinate situation insofar as this situation is revealed in the light of a specific end as being able to be used as a means to achieve this end.  The motive, on the contrary, is usually regarded as a subjective fact.  It is the collection of desires, emotions, and passions that drive me to perform a certain act.  The historian does not look for motives, and only reports them out of despair when the act in question cannot adequately be explained by reasons.  When Ferdinand Lot writes, for example, having shown that the reasons which are usually given for Constantine’s conversion are inadequate or mistaken: “It being proved that Constantine had everything to lose and apparently nothing to gain by embracing Christianity, there is only one possible conclusion, namely that he yielded to a sudden impulse, which we may call one of a pathological or supernatural order as we prefer,” 14 he abandons any explanation in terms of reasons—which strike him as irrelevant—and prefers an explanation that appeals to motives.  The explanation must therefore be sought in the historical agent’s psychological state—or even in his “mental” state.  Naturally, the result is that the event becomes entirely contingent, since another individual—with other passions and other desires—would have acted differently.  The psychologist, unlike the historian, prefers to look for motives: indeed he usually supposes these to be “contained within” the state of consciousness that provoked the action.  The ideal rational action will, therefore, be the one whose motives are practically non-existent and whose sole inspiration is an objective assessment of the situation.  An irrational or impassioned action will be characterized by the inverse proportion.  The relation between the reasons and the motives, in the everyday case in which they both exist, remains to be explained.  For example, I may join the socialist party because I believe this party serves the interests of justice and humanity or because I think it will become the major historical force in the years to follow my joining it: these are reasons.  And at the same time I may have some motives: a feeling of pity or charity for certain categories of oppressed people, shame at being “on the right side of the barricade,” as Gide says, or, again, a complex of inferiority, a desire to scandalize those close to me, etc.  What might we be trying to say when we state that I joined the socialist party because of these reasons and these motives? Obviously we are dealing here with two radically distinct layers of meaning.  How are we to compare them? How can we determine the share that each of them has in the decision we are considering? This difficulty, which is certainly the greatest difficulty among those raised by the everyday distinction between reasons and motives, has never been resolved; indeed, very few people have even glimpsed it.  The fact is that it amounts to positing the existence, in another form, of a conflict between the will and the passions.  But if classical theory shows itself to be incapable of assigning their distinctive influence to reasons and to motives in the simple case where they both contribute to reaching the same decision, it will be completely impossible for it to explain and even to conceive of a conflict between reasons and motives in which each group demands a particular decision.  We need therefore to start the whole discussion again, from the beginning.  Certainly, a reason is objective: it is the contemporary state of things, as it is disclosed to consciousness.  It is objective that the Roman aristocracy and the masses are corrupt in Constantine’s time or that the Catholic Church is willing to favor a monarch who will, in Clovis’s time, help it to defeat Arianism.  Nonetheless, this state of affairs can be revealed only to a for-itself, since the for-itself is, in general, the being through whom “there is” a world.  Better still, it can be revealed only to a for-itself who chooses itself in some way or other, i.e., a for-itself who has made for itself its own individuality.  In order to discover the instrumental implications of implement-things, we must have projected ourselves in some way or other.  Objectively, a knife is an instrument made of a blade and a handle.  I may apprehend it objectively as an instrument for slicing, for cutting; but, for want of a hammer, I may apprehend it the other way round as an instrument for hammering: I can make use of its handle to drive in a nail, and this apprehension is no less objective .  When Clovis weighs up the assistance that the Church may provide him with, it is not clear whether a group of prelates or even an individual bishop has made any overtures to him, or even that a member of the clergy has clearly thought about an alliance with a Catholic monarch.  The only facts that are strictly objective—those facts that any for-itself at all might observe—are the Church’s great power over the populations of Gaul, and the Church’s anxiety concerning Arian heresy.  For these observations to become organized as a reason for conversion, they must be separated from the whole—and for that they must be nihilated—and transcended toward their own potentiality: the Church’s potentiality, objectively apprehended by Clovis, will be to lend its support to a converted king.  But this potentiality can be revealed only if the situation is surpassed toward a state of affairs that does not yet exist—surpassed, in short, toward a nothingness.  In a nutshell, the world can only give its advice if we interrogate it, and we can only interrogate it in relation to a clearly defined end.  Far from determining the action, therefore, a reason only appears in and through the project of an action.  It is in and through the project of establishing his domination over the whole of Gaul that the state of the Western Church appears objectively to Clovis as a reason for converting.  In other words, the consciousness that makes a reason salient within the world as a whole already has its own structure, it has set its own ends, it has projected itself toward its possibles, and it has its own distinctive way of depending on these possibilities: in this case, the distinctive way of relating to one’s possibles is affective.  And this internal organization that consciousness has adopted—in the form of a non-positional consciousness (of) self—is strictly correlative to its carving out of reasons within the world.  Now, if we think about it, we have to admit that the for-itself’s internal structure—through which the for-itself’s reasons for acting are made to arise within the world—is an “irrational” fact, in the historical sense of the term.  We can in fact understand the technical utility of Clovis’s conversion quite rationally, in terms of the hypothesis in which his project was to conquer Gaul.  But in relation to his project of conquest, we cannot do the same.  It cannot “be explained.” Should we interpret it as an effect of Clovis’s ambition ? But what precisely is the ambition, other than the intention to conquer? How should we distinguish Clovis’s ambition from the precise project to conquer Gaul? It would therefore be pointless to conceive of this original project of conquest as “driven” by some preexisting motive , i.e., ambition.  It is quite true that ambition is a motive, since it belongs entirely to subjectivity.  But, as it cannot be distinguished from the project to conquer, we will say that this first project of his possibilities, in the light of which Clovis discovers a reason for converting, is precisely the motive .  Then everything is clarified and we are able to conceive of the relations between these three terms: reasons, motives, ends.  What we have here is a particular case of being-in-the-world: just as it is the for-itself that makes it happen, in its arising, that there is a world, so in this case it is the for-itself’s very being—insofar as its being is a pure project toward an end—that makes it happen that there is a specific objective structure of the world that, in the light of this end, deserves to be called a “reason.” The for-itself is therefore conscious of this reason.  But this positional consciousness of the reason is as a matter of principle a non-thetic consciousness of itself as a project toward an end.  In this sense it is a motive, which means it experiences itself non-thetically as a project—more or less harsh, more or less passionate—toward an end, in the very moment in which it constitutes itself as a consciousness revealing the world’s organization in terms of reasons.  Thus, reason and motive are correlatives, exactly as any non-thetic consciousness (of) self is the ontological correlative of a thetic consciousness of the object.  Just as any consciousness of something is a consciousness (of) self, the motive is in the same way nothing but the apprehension of the reason, insofar as this apprehension is conscious (of) self.  But, obviously, it follows that the reason, the motive, and the end are the three indissoluble terms in the bursting forth of a living and free consciousness, projecting itself toward its possibilities and defining itself through these possibilities.  How, therefore, does the motive come to appear to the psychologist as the affective content of an act of consciousness, insofar as this content determines another act or a decision? It is because the motive—which is not distinct from our non-thetic consciousness of self—slides into the past with that very consciousness, and stops being alive at the same time as it does.  As soon as a consciousness is pastified, it is what I have to be in the form of “was.” Thereafter, when I return to yesterday’s consciousness, it retains its intentional meaning and its meaning as a subjectivity but, as we saw, it is frozen and lies outside like a thing, since the past is in itself.  The motive, then, becomes what I am conscious of .  It may appear to me in the form of “ knowledge ” (as we saw earlier, the dead past haunts the present in the guise of knowledge ); it may also happen that I turn back toward the motive in order to explicate and to formulate it, guided by the knowledge that it has now become, for me.  In this case the motive is an object of consciousness; it is this very consciousness of which I am conscious.  It appears therefore—like my memories in general—as mine and, at the same time, as transcendent.  We are usually surrounded by these motives that no longer “grip” us because the decisions we make are not only to perform this or that action but also to accomplish actions we have decided on the night before, or to pursue enterprises to which we are committed; in general, whatever the moment in which consciousness grasps itself, consciousness apprehends itself as committed, and this very apprehension implies a knowledge of our motives for the commitment, or even a thematic and positional explication of these reasons.  It goes without saying that our grasp of our motive immediately refers us to the correlative reason, since the motive—even when it has been pastified and frozen into in-itself—retains, at least in its meaning, that it was conscious of a reason, i.e., the discovery of an objective structure of the world.  But as the motive is in-itself and the reason is objective, they are presented as a pair without ontological difference; indeed, we saw that our past gets lost in the midst of the world.  That is why we put them on an equal footing and why we can talk about an action’s reasons and its motives as if each of these could come into conflict or compete with the others, in some determinate ratio, in order to reach the decision.  Only, if the motive is transcendent, if it is only the irremediable being that we have to be in the mode of “was”—if, like all of our past, it is separated from us by a breadth of nothingness—it can act only if we reclaim it; on its own, it has no power.  It is, therefore, through the bursting forth of the committed consciousness itself that a value and a weight come to be conferred on its earlier motives and reasons.  That they have been and that its mission is to maintain their existence in the past: these matters do not depend on consciousness.  That I wanted this, or that, remains irremediable and even constitutes my essence, since my essence is what I was.  But as to the meaning that this desire, this fear, these objective considerations about the world, have for me now, when I project myself toward my futures, only I can decide that.  And I only decide this, precisely, through the very act by which I pro-ject myself toward my ends.  My recovery of my earlier motives—or their rejection, or their new appraisal—is not distinct from the project through which I assign new ends to myself and through which, in the light of these ends, I apprehend myself as discovering a supporting reason in the world.  Past motives, past reasons, present reasons and motives, future ends: all these are organized into an indissoluble unity by the very arising of a freedom that is beyond reasons, motives, and ends.  From this it follows that the will’s deliberation is always rigged.  How in fact can I evaluate reasons and motives whose value, precisely, has been conferred on them before any deliberation and through the choice that I make of myself? The illusion here is caused by the attempt to regard reasons and motives as entirely transcendent things that I might weigh as if they were weights, and which could possess a weight as a permanent property even while, on the other hand, we want to regard them as contents of consciousness—which is contradictory.  In fact, reasons and motives only have the weight that my project—i.e., the free production of the end, and of the act as having to be actualized—confers on them.  When I deliberate, the die is already cast.  And if I must come to deliberate, it is simply because it is part of my original project to take account of my motives by means of deliberation rather than through this or that other mode of discovery (through passion, for example, or quite simply by action, which reveals the organized collection of my reasons and ends in the way in which my speech informs me of my thought).  There is therefore a choice of deliberation as a procedure that will tell me what I am projecting and, in consequence, what I am.  And the free spontaneity organizes the choice of deliberation alongside the collection of motives-reasons and the end.  When the will intervenes, the decision is taken and it has no value apart from that of an announcement.  The voluntary act is distinguished from nonvoluntary spontaneity by the fact that the latter is a purely unreflected consciousness of its reasons, through the pure and simple project of its act.  As for the motive, it is not an object for itself in unreflected action but a mere non-positional consciousness (of) self.  The structure of a voluntary act, on the contrary, requires the appearance of a reflective consciousness that grasps its motive as a quasi-object, or even intends it—through the reflected consciousness—as a psychological object.  15 In this case, since the motive is grasped through the intermediary of the reflected consciousness, it is somewhat separate: to take up Husserl’s famous formulation, the mere act of voluntary reflection, through its reflective structure, operates the ἐποχή in relation to the reason; it suspends it, placing it between brackets.  In this way a semblance of evaluative deliberation can be introduced, owing to the fact that a deeper nihilation separates the reflective consciousness from the unreflected consciousness (or motive), and owing to the suspension of the motive.  Nonetheless, as we know, if the reflection’s result is to widen the fissure that separates the for-itself from itself, that does not yet make it its goal .  The goal of the reflective scissiparity is, as we saw, to retrieve the reflected so as to constitute the unrealizable “in-itself-for-itself” totality that is the fundamental value posited by the for-itself even as it arises in its being.  If therefore the will is essentially reflective, its goal is not so much to decide which end is to be achieved, because it has in any case placed its bets; instead, the will’s deep intention bears on the way to achieve this already posited end.  Insofar as he decides and acts, the for-itself who exists in the voluntary mode wills to retrieve himself.  The for-itself does not will only that he should be carried toward an end, or that he should choose himself as the one carried toward such an end: he also wills to retrieve himself as a spontaneous project toward this end or that.  The will’s ideal is to be an “in-itself-for-itself,” in the form of a project toward a specific end: that is obviously a reflective ideal, and it is the meaning of the satisfaction that may accompany a judgment such as “I did what I wanted.” But it is clear that reflective scissiparity in general has its foundation in a project that is deeper than itself which, in Part Two, Chapter 3, for want of a better term, we called its “motivation.” 16 Now that we have defined “motive” and “reason,” we should call this project that underlies reflection an “ intention .” To the extent therefore that the will is an instance of reflection, the fact of placing oneself at the level of the will in order to act requires as its foundation a more basic intention.  It is not enough for the psychologist to describe such and such a subject as bringing about his project in the mode of voluntary reflection; he must in addition be able to provide us with the deep intention that makes it happen that the subject actualizes his project in this mode of volition, rather than in any other mode—it being understood, moreover, that just any mode of consciousness would have led to the same actualization, once the ends had been posited by an original project.  Thus we have reached a freedom that is deeper than the will, merely by showing ourselves to be more demanding than the psychologists, i.e., by asking the question why , at the point where they confine themselves to noting that the mode of consciousness is volitional.  This brief examination does not aim to exhaust the question of the will: on the contrary, we should attempt a phenomenological description of the will for its own sake.  That is not our aim: we hope simply to have shown that the will is not a preeminent manifestation of freedom but a psychological event with a distinctive structure, constituted at the same level as the others, and which is, no more or less than the others, supported by an original and ontological freedom.  By the same token, freedom appears as an unanalyzable totality: the reasons, motives, and ends, just as much as the way in which the reasons, motives, and ends are grasped, are organized as a unity within the framework of this freedom, and must be understood on its basis.  Does that amount to saying that we must represent freedom as a series of unpredictable upheavals, comparable to the Epicurean clinamen ? Am I free to will just anything, at just any moment? And when I want to explain such and such a project, must I, at every instant, encounter the irrationality of a free and contingent choice? For as long as it seemed that the acknowledgment of freedom would have as its consequence these dangerous conceptions in complete contradiction to experience, many good minds turned away from the belief in freedom.  It has even been possible to claim that determinism—if one avoids confusing it with fatalism—is “more human” than the theory of free will.  If indeed it highlights the strict conditioning of our actions, it does at least give the reason 17 for each of them, and if it is strictly limited to the psychological domain—if it gives up looking for any further conditioning in the structure of the universe—it shows that the connection in our actions is in ourselves: we act as we are and our acts contribute to making us.  Let us examine more closely, however, the small number of certain results that our analysis has enabled us to acquire.  We have shown that freedom and the for-itself’s being are just one and the same: human-reality is free precisely to the extent to which it has its own nothingness to be.  It has this nothingness to be, as we saw, in many dimensions: first, by temporalizing itself, i.e., by being always at a distance from itself, which implies that it can never let itself be determined by its past to do this action or that; next, by arising as a consciousness of something and (of) itself, i.e., by being self-presence and not merely self, which implies that nothing can exist in consciousness that is not a consciousness of existing and that, in consequence, nothing external to consciousness can motivate it; and, last, by being a transcendence, which is to say not something that exists first in order to place itself afterward in relation to such and such an end but, on the contrary, a being that is from the outset a pro-ject, i.e., which defines itself through its end.  Thus it is no part of our intention here to invoke something arbitrary or capricious: an existent that, as consciousness, is necessarily separated from all other existents, because they only have any connection with it to the extent that they are for it, and which decides on its past (in the form of tradition) in the light of its future rather than allowing it purely and simply to determine its present, and which is acquainted with what it is by something other than itself , i.e., by an end that it is not and that it projects from the other side of the world; this is what we mean by a “free existent.” That does not mean at all that I am free to stand up or sit down, to come in or go out, to run away or to confront the danger, if we mean by “freedom” a capricious pure contingency, unlawful, gratuitous, and incomprehensible.  Of course, each of my acts, even the smallest, is wholly free in the sense we have just clarified; but that does not mean that it can be anyhow , or even that it is unpredictable.  Yet—it will be said—if we cannot understand it either on the basis of the state of the world or on the basis of the totality of my past, taken as something irremediable, how could it be possible for it not to be gratuitous? Let us take a closer look.  According to the view that is generally accepted today, to be free does not only mean to choose oneself.  A choice is said to be free if it is such that it could have been other than it is.  I have gone on an excursion with some friends.  After several hours of walking, I am growing tired, and eventually my fatigue becomes oppressive.  At first I resist and then suddenly I let myself go: I give in; I throw my bag down on the side of the road, and I drop down beside it.  I will be reproached for my action, with the implication that I was free, which means not only that nothing and nobody determined my action but also that I could have resisted my fatigue, done as my fellow travelers did, and waited for my rest until we reached our stop.  I will defend myself by saying that I was too tired.  Who is right? Or, instead, hasn’t the debate been established on the wrong grounds? There is no doubt that I could have done otherwise, but that is not the problem.  We should instead formulate it like this: could I have done otherwise without markedly changing the organic totality of projects that I am, or would the fact of resisting my fatigue, rather than remaining a mere local and accidental modification of my behavior, be possible only with a radical transformation of my being-in-the-world—a transformation that is, moreover, possible .  In other words, I could have done otherwise, agreed: but at what cost ? We will reply to this question first with a theoretical description that will allow us to grasp our central claim.  Then we can see whether concrete reality shows itself to be more complicated and if, without contradicting the results of our theoretical investigation, it might not lead us to enrich these results and make them more flexible.  We should note first that fatigue, in itself, cannot induce my decision.  It is only—as we saw in relation to physical pain—the way in which I exist my body.  In the first instance, it is not the object of a positional consciousness but my consciousness’s very facticity.  If therefore I am walking through the countryside, it is the surrounding world that reveals itself to me, that is the object of my consciousness; that is what I transcend toward the possibilities that are mine—for example, to arrive this evening at the place that I settled on earlier.  Only, to the extent that I grasp this landscape with my eyes, which unfold the distances, with my legs, which climb the slopes and thereby cause new scenes and new obstacles to appear and to disappear, with my back, which carries the bag, I have a non-positional consciousness (of) this body—which regulates my relations with the world and signifies my engagement in the world—in the form of fatigue.  Objectively, and correlated with this non-thetic consciousness, the roads are revealed as interminable, the inclines as more difficult , the sun as more intense, etc.  But I am still not thinking my fatigue; I do not grasp it as a quasi-object of my reflection.  There comes a moment, however, when I try to consider it and to retrieve it, and this intention itself ought to be interpreted.  Let us, however, take it for what it is.  It is not a contemplative apprehension of my fatigue; rather—as we saw in relation to pain—I suffer my fatigue.  In other words, a reflective consciousness is directed on my fatigue in order to live it and to confer upon it a value and a practical relation to myself.  It is only at this level that my fatigue can appear to me as bearable or as intolerable.  In itself, it will never be anything like that; rather, it is the reflective for-itself who, as he arises, suffers his fatigue as intolerable.  The essential question arises here: my fellow travelers are in good health like me; they are more or less as fit as I am, so, even though it is not possible to compare psychological events that unfold in different subjectivities, I will ordinarily conclude—and witnesses will conclude on the basis of an objective consideration of our bodies-for-the-Other—that they are more or less “as tired as I am.” How therefore does it happen that they suffer from their fatigue in a different way? It will be said that the difference is because “I am soft” and they are not.  But, even though this assessment has an undeniable practical bearing and can be counted on when it is a matter of deciding whether or not to invite me on another excursion, it cannot satisfy us here.  As we have seen, in fact, to be ambitious is to have the project of conquering a throne or honors; it is not a given , something that might push one toward conquest, but the conquest itself.  Similarly “being soft” cannot be a factual given, and it is only a name that is given to the way in which I suffer my fatigue.  If therefore I want to understand the conditions in which I may suffer my fatigue as intolerable, we should not appeal to givens that are alleged to be factual, which reveal themselves to be only a choice; we should try to examine this choice itself and to see whether it might be explained within the perspective of a wider choice, in which it is integrated as a secondary structure.  If in fact I question one of these companions, he will explain that of course he is tired, but he likes his fatigue: he surrenders to it as if to a bath; it seems to him in some way to be the favored instrument for discovering the world around him, adapting to the stony harshness of the paths, discovering the “mountainous” import of the slopes; similarly, it is this slight insolation on his neck and this slight humming in his ears that enable him to achieve direct contact with the sun.  In the end, the feeling of effort for him is that of conquered fatigue.  But as his fatigue is nothing other than the passion that he endures in order that the dust on the paths, the burning of the sun, the harshness of the roads, should maximally exist, his effort—which is to say this gentle familiarity with a fatigue that he loves, to which he surrenders, and which, however, he directs—presents itself as a way of appropriating the mountain, of suffering it right to the end and triumphing over it.  In our next chapter, in fact, we will see what the words “to have” mean, and the extent to which “ doing ” or “ making ” something is a means of appropriation .  Thus my companion lives his fatigue within a larger project that is a trusting surrender to nature, a passion consented to in order for it to exist at its peak, and at the same time a gentle domination and appropriation.  It is only in and through this project that his fatigue can be understood and can have a meaning for him.  But this meaning and this larger project are still, by themselves, “ unselbstständig .” They are not enough because they presuppose, precisely, my companion’s particular relationship to his body, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, his relationship to things.  Indeed, it may easily be understood that there are as many ways of existing one’s body as there are for-itselfs, even though, naturally, certain original structures are invariable and constitute human-reality in each instance: we will deal elsewhere with the relation of the individual to the species (as it has been incorrectly described) and with the conditions of universal truth.  For now, we are able to conceive, on the basis of a thousand significant events, that there is, for example, a specific type of flight from facticity that consists precisely in surrendering oneself to this facticity, which is to say, in short, in trustingly taking it up and loving it, in order to try to retrieve it.  This original project of retrieval is therefore a specific choice made by the for-itself of itself in the presence of the problem of being.  Its project remains a nihilation, but this nihilation turns back to the in-itself it nihilates, and is expressed by a particular valorization of facticity.  This is expressed notably in the thousand ways of behaving that we describe as surrender .  To surrender to fatigue, to heat, to hunger, and to thirst, to collapse with relish onto a chair, a bed, to relax, to try to be absorbed into one’s own body, no longer beneath the eyes of another (as in the case of masochism) but in the for-itself’s original solitude: none of these modes of behavior may ever be limited to itself, and we feel this keenly, since, in another person, they irritate or attract us; their condition is an initial project to reclaim the body, i.e., an attempt to solve the problem of the absolute (the in-itself-for-itself).  This initial form may itself be limited to a profound tolerance of facticity: in that case the project to “make oneself body” will mean the happy surrender to a thousand passing little indulgences, a thousand little desires, a thousand weaknesses.  Recall Mr.  Bloom in Joyce’s Ulysses inhaling with satisfaction, while he responds to the needs of nature, “the intimate smell rising from under him.” 18 But it may also happen—and this is the case with my companion—that, through the body and by deferring to the body, the for-itself tries to reclaim the totality of the non-conscious, i.e., the whole universe insofar as it is a set of material things .  In this case the synthesis of the in-itself with the for-itself that is aimed at will be the quasi-pantheist synthesis of the totality of the in-itself with the for-itself who reclaims it.  Here the body is an instrument of the synthesis: it loses itself in its fatigue, for example, in order that this in-itself should maximally exist.  And as it is the body which the for-itself exists as its own , this passion of the body coincides for the for-itself with the project of “making the in-itself exist.” In its entirety this attitude—which belongs to one of my fellow travelers—may express itself through the obscure feeling of a kind of mission: he goes on this excursion because the mountain he is going to climb and the forests he is going to pass through exist , and it is his mission to be the person through whom their meaning will be made manifest.  And he thereby attempts to be the person who founds them in their very existence.  We will come back in our next chapter to this appropriative relation of the for-itself to the world, but we do not yet have at our disposal the necessary materials to elucidate it in full.  In any case, what appears obvious after our analysis is that, in order to understand the way in which my companion suffers his fatigue, a regressive analysis is necessarily required, which will lead us right up to an initial project.  Is the project that we have outlined “ selbstständig ” now? Certainly—and we may easily be convinced: in fact, by repeated regression, we have reached the original relationship that the for-itself chooses with its facticity and with the world.  But is this original relationship anything other than the for-itself’s being-in-the-world itself, insofar as this being-in-the-world is a choice—i.e., have we reached the original type of nihilation through which the for-itself has its own nothingness to be? From this point on no interpretation may be attempted, because it would implicitly presuppose the for-itself’s being-in-the-world, just as all the demonstrations that have been attempted of Euclid’s postulate implicitly presuppose the adoption of this postulate.  In consequence, if I apply the same method to interpret the way in which I suffer my fatigue, I will in the first place grasp in myself, for example, a mistrust of my body, a manner of not wanting to “put up with it,” of counting it for nothing, which is merely one of the many possible modes for me of existing my body .  I will discover without difficulty an analogous mistrust in relation to the in-itself and, for example, an original project to reclaim the in-itself that I am nihilating through the intermediary of others —which returns me to one of the initial projects that we listed in the previous part.  In consequence, rather than managing my fatigue “easily,” I will apprehend it “awkwardly,” as an unwelcome phenomenon that I wish to be rid of—simply because it incarnates my body and my brute contingency in the midst of the world, whereas my project is to rescue my body and my presence to the world through the other’s acts of looking.  I am also returned to my original project, i.e., to my being-in-the-world, insofar as this being is choice.  We are not concealing from ourselves how much the method of this analysis leaves to be desired.  The fact is that everything remains to be done in this domain: it is a matter, in fact, of drawing out the meanings implied by an act—by every act—and of moving from there to meanings that are richer and deeper, until we come across the meaning which no longer implies any other meaning and which points only to itself.  Most people practice this retracing dialectic spontaneously; we can even observe that, given within one’s knowledge of oneself or the Other, there is a spontaneous understanding of the hierarchy of interpretations.  A gesture indicates a “ Weltanschauung ,” and we sense it.  But nobody has tried to systematically draw out the meanings implied by an act.  Only one school of thought has set out from the same initial evidence as we have, and that is the Freudian school.  For Freud, as for us, an act cannot be limited to itself: it immediately refers to deeper structures.  And psychoanalysis is the method that enables us to explicate these structures.  Freud wonders, as we do: Under which conditions is it possible for this person to have accomplished this particular action? And, like us, he refuses to interpret the action by means of the antecedent moment, i.e., to conceive of a horizontal psychological determinism.  The act appears to him as symbolic , which is to say that it seems to express a deeper desire that cannot itself be interpreted on the basis of an initial determination of the subject’s libido.  Only Freud is aiming in this way to constitute a vertical determinism.  In addition, with this approach his conception will necessarily refer to the subject’s past.  For him, affectivity is at the root of the action, in the form of psychophysiological drives.  But this affectivity is from the outset a blank slate in each of us; it is external circumstances and, in the end, the subject’s history that will decide whether such and such a tendency will fix on such and such an object.  It is the child’s situation within his family that will determine the birth of the Oedipus complex in him: in other societies, made up of families of another type—and as has been noted, for example, among the primitive peoples of the Pacific coral islands—this complex cannot be formed.  In addition, it is external circumstances, again, that will decide whether, at the age of puberty, the complex will “be liquidated” or, on the contrary, will remain the pole of sexual life.  In that way, and through the mediation of history, Freud’s vertical determinism is still based on a horizontal determinism.  Of course, some symbolic action expresses an underlying and contemporary desire, just as this desire manifests a deeper complex, and all this within a single psychological process; but it is no less true that the complex preexists its symbolic manifestation, and it is the past that has constituted it as it is, in accordance with the classic connections—transference, condensation, etc.—that we find mentioned not only in psychoanalysis but in every attempt at a deterministic reconstruction of psychological life.  In consequence, the dimension of the future does not exist for psychoanalysis.  Human-reality loses one of its ecstases and has to be interpreted only by means of a regression, setting out from the present, toward the past.  At the same time, the subject’s fundamental structures, which are signified in his acts, are not signified for him but for an objective witness who makes use of discursive methods to explicate these meanings.  No preontological understanding of the meaning of his acts is accorded to the subject.  And that can be easily conceived, since, in spite of everything, these acts are only an effect of the past—which by definition is out of reach—rather than seeking to inscribe their goal within the future.  We must limit ourselves therefore to taking as our inspiration the psychoanalytic method , which is to say that we must try to draw out the meanings of an act on the basis of the principle that every action, however insignificant it may be, is not simply the effect of the previous psychological state and does not depend on a linear determinism but is included, on the contrary, as a secondary structure within global structures and, finally, within the totality that I am.  Otherwise, indeed, I would have to understand myself either as a horizontal flux of phenomena, each of which is conditioned from outside by the preceding one, or as a substance that supports the senseless flowing of its modes.  Both of these outlooks would result in our mixing up the for-itself and the in-itself.  But if we accept the method of psychoanalysis—and we will return to this at length in the following chapter—we need to apply it in the opposite direction .  We conceive of each act, in fact, as a phenomenon that can be understood, and we do not allow for a determinism by “chance,” any more than Freud.  But, rather than understanding the phenomenon in question on the basis of the past, we conceive of the act of understanding as a return from the future toward the present.  The way in which I suffer my fatigue does not depend at all on the accident of the slope I am climbing or the more or less restless night that I have spent: these factors may contribute to constituting my fatigue itself, but not the way I suffer it.  But we refuse to see in it—as a disciple of Adler would—an expression of the inferiority complex, for example, in the sense in which this complex would be an earlier formation.  We do not deny that a certain raging and stiffened way of fighting against fatigue may express a so-called inferiority complex.  But the inferiority complex itself is a project of my own for-itself in the world, in the presence of the other.  As such, it is always transcendence; further, as such, it is a way of choosing oneself.  This inferiority, which I struggle against and yet recognize, was chosen by me at the outset; without doubt, it is the meaning of my various forms of “failure behavior,” but it is precisely nothing other than the organized totality of my failure behavior as a projected template, as the general specification for my being, and each failure behavior is itself a transcendence, since each time I surpass the real toward my possibilities.  To give in to fatigue, for example, is to transcend the path still to be covered by constituting it with the meaning “path that is too difficult to follow.” It is impossible to consider the feeling of inferiority seriously without determining it on the basis of the future and my possibilities.  Even observations such as “I am ugly,” “I am stupid,” etc., are in essence anticipations.  It is not a matter purely of observing my ugliness but of grasping the coefficient of adversity presented by women, or society, to my undertakings.  And that can be discovered only by and in the choice of these undertakings.  Thus the inferiority complex is a free and global project of myself, as inferior next to another; it is the way in which I choose to take on my being-for-the-Other, the free solution that I find for the insurmountable scandal of the other’s existence.  Thus we must understand my inferiority reactions and my failure behavior on the basis of the free sketch of my inferiority as the choice of myself in the world.  We grant to the psychoanalysts that every human reaction can a priori be understood.  But we reproach them with having failed to recognize just this initial “understandability” by trying to explain the reaction in question by means of an earlier reaction, which reintroduces the mechanism of causality: we must define the understanding in other terms.  We can understand any action as a project of oneself toward a possible.  In the first place it can be understood insofar as it offers a rational content that may immediately be grasped—I put my bag on the ground in order to rest for a moment—which is to say insofar as we immediately grasp the possible that it projects and the end at which it aims.  Next, it can be understood because the possible we are considering refers to other possibles, and these to others, and so on right up to the ultimate possibility that I am.  And the understanding goes in two opposite directions: through a regressive psychoanalysis, we move back from the act in question right up to my ultimate possible; through a synthetic progression, we come back down to the envisaged act and we grasp its integration within the total figure.  This figure, which we designate as our ultimate possibility, is not one possible among others—not even, as Heidegger would have it, the possibility of dying or of “no longer realizing a presence in the world.” 19 Each particular possibility, in fact, is articulated within an ensemble.  This ultimate possibility must on the contrary be conceived as the unitary synthesis of all our current possibles: each of these possibles dwelling in an undifferentiated state within the ultimate possibility until some particular circumstance comes to throw it into relief, without, however, eliminating its membership of the totality.  Indeed we noted in Part Two 20 that the perceptual apprehension of any object comes about against the ground of the world .  By that, we meant that what psychologists are in the habit of calling “perception” could not be limited to the objects that are strictly “seen” or “heard,” etc., at a specific instant but rather that the objects in question refer by means of various implications and meanings to the totality of the existent in itself on whose basis they are apprehended.  Thus it is not true that I move, step by step, from this table to the bedroom where I am, and then, leaving it, from there to the hallway, the staircase and the street—in order eventually, by reaching the limit, to conceive of the world as the sum of all these existents.  But, quite to the contrary, I cannot perceive any implement-thing, other than on the basis of the absolute totality of all existents, because my initial being is being-in-the-world.  Thus we find in things, insofar “as there are ” things for man, a constant call toward their integration, which means that in order to grasp them we move down from the total and immediately actualized integration to reach this particular structure which can be interpreted only in relation to this totality.  But if on the other hand there is a world, it is because we arise in the world all at once and in totality.  We noted in fact, in that same chapter devoted to transcendence, that the in-itself was not capable on its own of any worldly unity at all.  But our arising is a Passion, in the sense that we lose ourselves in nihilation in order for the world to exist.  Thus the first phenomenon of being-in-the-world is the original relation between the totality of the in-itself or world and my own detotalized totality: I choose myself in my entirety in the world in its entirety.  And just as I come from the world to a particular this , I come from myself as a detotalized totality to the sketch of one of my particular possibilities, since I can only grasp a particular this against the ground of the world in the circumstance of a particular project of myself.  But in that case, just as I can only grasp some this against the ground of the world by surpassing it toward this or that possibility, so too can I only project myself beyond the this toward this or that possibility against the ground of my ultimate and total possibility.  In this way my ultimate and total possibility—as the original integration of all my particular possibles—and the world—as the totality that is bestowed on existents through my arising to being—are two strictly correlative notions.  I can perceive the hammer (in other words, make a start on my “hammering”) only against the ground of the world but, conversely, I can begin this act of “hammering” only against the ground of the totality of myself, and on its basis.  Thus we have found the fundamental act of freedom, the act that gives its meaning to any particular action I may be led to consider: this constantly renewed act cannot be distinguished from my being; it is the choice of myself within the world and, by the same token, my discovery of the world.  This allows us to avoid the pitfall of the unconscious which psychoanalysis comes up against from the outset.  Indeed, it might be objected, if there is nothing in consciousness which is not the consciousness of being, this fundamental choice must be a conscious choice; but can you strictly claim that you are conscious, when you give in to fatigue, of all the implications presupposed by this act? Our answer will be that we are perfectly conscious of them.  Only this consciousness itself must be limited by the structure of consciousness in general, and of the choice that we make.  As far as the latter is concerned, we must emphasize the fact that we are not at all dealing here with a deliberate choice.  And that is not because it is less conscious or less explicit than a process of deliberation but on the contrary because it is the foundation of any deliberation and because, as we have seen, any deliberation requires an interpretation on the basis of an original choice.  We must therefore protect ourselves against the illusion that turns original freedom into a positing of reasons and motives as objects , and then a decision on the basis of these reasons and motives.  On the contrary, once we have a reason and motive, which is to say an evaluation of the things and structures in the world, we already have a positing of ends and, in consequence, choice.  But that does not mean that the underlying choice is thereby unconscious.  It is one and the same as the consciousness that we have of ourselves.  This consciousness, as we know, can only be non-positional: it is we-consciousness because it cannot be distinguished from our being.  And as our being is precisely our original choice, our consciousness (of) choice is identical to the consciousness that we have (of) ourselves.  To choose, one has to be conscious and, to be conscious, one has to choose.  Choice and consciousness are one and the same thing.  This is what many psychologists have sensed when they asserted that consciousness “is selection.” 21 But by failing to trace this “selection” back to its ontological foundation, they continued to occupy a perspective from which selection appears as a gratuitous function of a consciousness that is moreover substantial.  We might in particular reproach Bergson for this.  But if it has been fully established that consciousness is nihilation, we can conceive that to have consciousness of ourselves and to choose ourselves are but one and the same.  This is what explains the difficulties encountered by moralists such as Gide when they wanted to define the purity of feelings.  What is the difference, Gide asked, 22 between a feeling that we want to have and a feeling that is felt ? The truth is that there is none: “to want to love” and to love are one and the same, since to love is to choose oneself as loving by becoming conscious of loving.  If the πάθος is free, it is choice.  We have sufficiently stressed—in particular in the chapter about Temporality—that Descartes’s cogito must be extended.  In fact, as we saw, to become conscious (of) oneself never means to become conscious of an instant, because the instant is only a mental creation and—even if it existed—a consciousness that grasped itself in the instant would grasp nothing .  I can become conscious of myself only as this man engaged in this or that undertaking, counting on this or that success, fearing this or that outcome, and, through the collection of these anticipations, sketching out his figure in its entirety.  And that is just how I grasp myself, in this moment while I am writing; I am not the mere perceptual consciousness of my hand tracing signs on the paper, for I am far ahead of this hand, reaching right out to the book’s completion and the meaning of this book—and of philosophical activity in general—in my life; and it is within the framework of this project, which is to say the framework of what I am, that specific projects toward more limited possibilities are inserted, such as expounding this idea in such and such a way, or ceasing to write for a moment, or flicking through a work in which I am looking for such and such a reference, etc.  Only the mistake would be to think that, corresponding to this global choice, there is an analytic and differentiated consciousness.  My ultimate and initial project—because it is both of these at once—is, as we will see, always the sketch of a solution to the problem of being.  But this solution is not first conceived and then actualized: we are this solution, we make it exist through our very commitment and therefore we can grasp it only by living it.  In this way we are always entirely present to ourselves but, precisely because we are entirely present, we cannot hope to have an analytic and detailed consciousness of what we are.  This consciousness, moreover, can only be non-thetic.  But, on the other hand, the world sends back to us, through its very articulation, the image of what we are.  This does not mean (as, moreover, we have seen) that we are able to decipher this image—i.e., to examine it in detail and subject it to analysis—but rather that the world necessarily appears to us as we are; indeed, it is by surpassing it toward ourselves that we make the world appear the way it is.  We choose the world—not in its in-itself construction but in its meaning—by choosing ourselves.  For the internal negation through which we make the world appear (by denying, in relation to ourselves, that we are the world) can exist only if it is at the same time a projection toward a possible.  It is the very way in which I entrust myself to the inanimate, in which I surrender myself to my body—or, on the contrary, in which I stiffen myself against both of these—that makes my body and the inanimate world, with their distinctive value, appear.  There too, in consequence, I have full consciousness of myself and my fundamental projects and, this time, this consciousness is positional.  Only, precisely because it is positional, what it delivers to me is the transcendent image of what I am.  The value of things, their instrumental role, their real proximity and distance (which bear no relation to their spatial proximity and distance), do nothing other than sketch out my image, which is to say my choice.  My clothing (uniform or suit, soft or starched shirt), untidy or neat, sophisticated or vulgar, my furniture, my street, the town where I live, the books with which I surround myself, my ways of entertaining myself, everything that is mine, which is in the end the world of which I am constantly conscious—at least as the meaning implied by the object I am looking at or using—everything teaches me, myself, about my choice, i.e., about my being.  But the structure of positional consciousness is such that I cannot reduce this knowledge to a subjective apprehension of myself, and it directs me to other objects that I am producing or arranging in relation to the order of the preceding objects, without being able to notice that I am hereby sculpting in more and more detail my figure within the world.  In this way we are fully conscious of the choice that we are.  And if it is objected that, according to these remarks, one would have to be conscious not of having chosen ourselves but of choosing ourselves, our answer will be that this consciousness is expressed through the twofold “feeling” of anguish and responsibility.  Anguish, abandonment, responsibility, either muted or at full strength, constitute in fact the quality of our consciousness insofar as this latter is purely and simply freedom.  Earlier we raised a question: I gave in to fatigue, we said, and probably I could have done otherwise, but at what cost ? We are now in a position to answer it.  Our analysis has just shown us, in effect, that this act was not gratuitous .  Of course, it could not be explained by a motive or a reason conceived as the content of an earlier “state” of consciousness; but it needed to be interpreted on the basis of an original project of which it formed an integral part.  In consequence it becomes clear that we cannot suppose the action could have been modified without at the same time supposing a fundamental modification in my original choice of myself.  This way of giving in to my fatigue and dropping down onto the edge of the road expresses a certain initial stiffening against my body and the inanimate in-itself.  It belongs in the category of a certain vision of the world in which difficulties may appear as “not worth putting up with” and in which, precisely, the motive—being pure non-thetic consciousness and in consequence an initial project of oneself toward an absolute end (a specific aspect of the in-itself-for-itself)—is the apprehension of the world (the heat, the distance from the town, the futility of one’s efforts, etc.) as a reason to stop walking.  Thus this possible —to stop—only gains its meaning in theory in and through the hierarchy of possibilities that I am, on the basis of this ultimate and initial possible.  That does not imply that I must necessarily stop but merely that I can refuse to stop only through a radical conversion of my being-in-the-world, which is to say by a sudden metamorphosis of my initial project, which is to say by a different choice of myself and of my ends.  Moreover, this modification is always possible.  The anguish which, when it is disclosed, manifests our freedom to our consciousness testifies to this constant alterability of our initial project.  In anguish we do not simply grasp the fact that the possibles we are projecting are constantly eaten into by the freedom still to come; in addition, we apprehend our choice—which is to say ourselves—as being unjustifiable , which means we grasp our choice as something that does not derive from any earlier reality and as having, on the contrary, to serve as the foundation of the set of meanings which constitute reality.  The unjustifiability is not only the subjective acknowledgment of the absolute contingency of our being but also that of the internalization of this contingency, and my taking it on for myself.  For the choice, as we will see, which is born out of the contingency of the in-itself which it nihilates, transports that contingency to the level of the for-itself’s own gratuitous determination by itself.  In this way we are constantly engaged in our choice, and constantly conscious of the fact that we ourselves can suddenly reverse this choice and change course, because we project the future through our very being, and we constantly eat away at it through our own existential freedom, declaring to ourselves by means of the future what we are, and lacking any grip on this future, which remains always possible without ever passing into the ranks of the real .  Thus we are constantly threatened with the nihilation of our current choice, constantly threatened with choosing ourselves—and in consequence with becoming—other than we are.  Just because our choice is absolute, it is fragile , which is to say that, by positing our freedom through it, we posit at the same time the constant possibility of its becoming something that is “on this side,” and pastified, in relation to an “over on that side” that I will be.  We should be clear nonetheless that our current choice is not such as to provide us with any reason for making it past through a subsequent choice.  In fact, our choice originally creates all the reasons and all the motives that might lead us to partial actions, and it arranges the world with its meanings, its equipment-structures and its coefficient of adversity.  This absolute change by which we are threatened from our birth to our death remains constantly unpredictable and incomprehensible.  If we even envisage other fundamental attitudes as possible , we only ever consider them from outside, as the behavior of the other.  And if we try to conform our actions to it, they do not for all that lose their character of externality and of transcended-transcendence.  Indeed, to “understand them” would be to have already chosen them.  We will return to this.  In addition, we should not represent the original choice as “producing itself from one instant to the other”; that would return us to the “instantaneist” 23 conception of consciousness which Husserl, for example, could not leave behind.  Since, on the contrary, it is consciousness that temporalizes itself, we must conceive of the original choice as unfolding time and as participating in the unity of the three ecstases.  To choose ourselves is to nihilate ourselves, i.e., to make it the case that a future arrives to acquaint us with what we are by conferring a meaning on our past.  Thus there is not, as in Descartes, a succession of instants, separated by nothingnesses, such that my choice at instant t is unable to act on my choice at instant t 1 .  To choose is to make it the case that, along with my commitment, a certain finite extension of concrete and continuous duration arises, which is precisely what separates me from the actualization of my original possibles.  Thus freedom, choice, nihilation, and temporalization are just one and the same thing.  However, the instant is not an empty philosophers’ invention.  Of course, when I am engaged in my task there is no subjective instant: for me at this moment, for example, in which I am writing, trying to grasp my thoughts and to put them in order, there is no instant but only my constant pursued-pursuit toward the ends that define me (the explication of the ideas that will be the basis of this work); and yet we are constantly threatened by the instant .  In other words, we are such that, through the very choice of our freedom, we can always make the instant appear as a break in our ecstatic unity.  What, then, is an instant? The instant cannot be carved out within the process of temporalization of a concrete project: we have just shown this.  But neither can it be assimilated to the first term or the final term (if it has to exist) of this process.  That is because both these terms are incorporated from inside within the totality of the process and form an integral part of it.  Each of them therefore has only one of the characteristics of the instant: the first term, in fact, is incorporated in the process whose first term it is, insofar as it is its beginning.  But, on the other hand, it is limited by a nothingness before it, insofar as it is a beginning.  The final term is incorporated in the process that it terminates, insofar as it is its end: the last note belongs to the melody.  But it is followed by a nothingness that limits it, insofar as it is an end.  The instant, if it is to be capable of existing, must be bounded by a double nothingness.  That is wholly inconceivable, as we have shown, if the instant must be given prior to all the processes of temporalization.  But within the temporalization’s very development, we are able to produce instants if certain processes arise on the collapse of earlier processes.  In that case the instant will be a beginning and an end.  In brief, if the end of a project coincides with the beginning of another project, an ambiguous temporal reality will arise that will be limited by an earlier nothingness insofar as it is a beginning, and by a later nothingness, insofar as it is an end.  But this temporal structure will only be concrete if the commencement is itself given as the end of the process that it pastifies.  A beginning that is given as the end of an earlier project: that is what an instant must be.  It will only exist therefore if we are, in relation to ourselves, a beginning and an end within the unity of a single act.  Now, this is precisely what occurs in the case of a radical modification of our fundamental project.  Through the free choice of this modification, indeed, we temporalize a project that we are and we become acquainted with our chosen being through a future; in this way the pure present belongs to the new temporalization as a beginning, and it receives its own nature as a beginning from the future that has just arisen.  It is only the future, in fact, which can return to the pure present to characterize it as a beginning; otherwise this present would be just any old present.  In this way the choice’s present already belongs, as an integrated structure, to the new totality which has begun.  But, on the other hand, it is not possible for this choice not to determine itself in connection with the past which it has to be.  It is even, as a matter of principle, a decision to grasp as past the choice whose place it is taking.  A converted atheist is not merely a believer: he is a believer who has denied atheism in relation to himself, who has rendered as past in himself his project of being atheist.  In this way the new choice presents itself as a beginning insofar as it is an end and as an end insofar as it is a beginning; it is bounded by a double nothingness and, as such, it has brought about a fracture in the ecstatic unity of our being.  However, the instant is itself only a nothingness because, wherever we direct our view, we will grasp only a continuous temporalization which—depending on the direction in which we look—will be either the completed and closed series which has just passed, carrying its final term with it, or else the living temporalization that is beginning, and whose first term is caught up and carried along by the future possibility.  Thus each fundamental choice defines the direction of the pursued-pursuit at the same time as it temporalizes itself.  That does not mean that it provides an initial impulse , 24 or that there is anything already acquired, of which I might take advantage as long as I stay within the limits of this choice.  On the contrary, the nihilation is pursued continuously and, in consequence, my free and continuous reclamation of this choice is indispensable.  Only this reclaiming does not happen from instant to instant , as I freely take up my choice again: because in this case there is no instant, the reclamation is so tightly incorporated in the whole of the process that it has none of the meaning of an instant, nor can it have.  But precisely because it is free, and constantly taken up by freedom again, my choice has freedom itself as its limit, which means it is haunted by the specter of the instant.  As long as I continue to reclaim my choice, the pastification of the process will come about in perfect ontological continuity with the present.  The pastified process is still organized with the present nihilation, in the form of knowledge —i.e., as a lived and internalized meaning—without ever being an object for the consciousness which projects itself toward its own ends.  But, precisely because I am free, I always have the possibility of positing my immediate past as an object.  In other words, while my previous consciousness was a pure non-positional consciousness (of) the past (insofar as it constituted itself as an internal negation of the co-present real, and became acquainted with its meaning by ends that it posited as re claimed) with its new choice, consciousness posits its own past as an object, which means it assesses it and orients itself in relation to it.  This act of objectification of the immediate past is one and the same thing as the new choice of other ends: it plays a part in making the instant spring up as a nihilating break in the process of temporalization.  It will be easier for the reader to understand the results we have obtained through this analysis if we compare them to another theory of freedom—for example, that of Leibniz.  When Adam takes the apple, for Leibniz as for us, it would have been possible for him not to take it.  25 But for him, as for us, the implications of this move are so numerous and so ramified that, in the end, to assert that it would have been possible for Adam not to take the apple amounts to saying that another Adam would have been possible.  Thus Adam’s contingency is one and the same as his freedom, since this contingency means that this real Adam is surrounded by an infinite number of possible Adams, each of which is characterized, in relation to the real Adam, by a slight or deep alteration in all his attributes, which is in the end an alteration in his substance.  For Leibniz, therefore, the freedom called for by human-reality is like an organization of three different notions.  Someone is free if he (1) rationally determines himself to perform an act; (2) is such that this act can be fully understood in terms of the very nature of the person who committed it; (3) is contingent, which is to say exists in such a way that other individuals committing other acts in relation to the same situation would have been possible.  But, owing to the necessary connection between possibles, another act by Adam would only have been possible for and by another Adam, and the existence of another Adam implied that of another world.  We acknowledge with Leibniz that Adam’s act commits Adam’s person in his entirety, and that another act would have been understood in the light of, and in the framework of, another Adam person.  But Leibniz falls back into a necessitarianism that is completely opposed to the idea of freedom when he places the very formula of Adam’s substance at the start, like a premise from which Adam’s act will follow as one of its partial conclusions, i.e., when he reduces the chronological order to being only a symbolic expression of the logical order.  One result of this, indeed, is that the act is strictly necessitated by Adam’s very essence, so that the contingency which, according to Leibniz, makes freedom possible is entirely contained within Adam’s essence.  And this essence is not chosen by Adam himself but by God.  Therefore it is true that the act committed by Adam follows necessarily from Adam’s essence and hence that it depends on Adam himself and on nobody else, which is certainly one condition of freedom.  But, for Adam himself, Adam’s essence itself is a given : Adam did not choose it; he could not have chosen to be Adam.  In consequence, he does not in any way bear responsibility for his being.  After that, the fact that it is possible to attribute to him—once it is given—a relative responsibility for his act does not make much difference.  For us, on the contrary, Adam is not defined by his essence, because essence, for human-reality, comes after existence.  He is defined through the choice of his ends, i.e., through the arising of an ecstatic temporalization that has nothing in common with the order of logic.  In this way, Adam’s contingency expresses the finite choice he has made of himself.  But now it is the future, not the past, that acquaints him with his person : he chooses to learn what he is through the ends toward which he projects himself—i.e., through the totality of his tastes, his inclinations, his hates, etc., insofar as there is a thematic organization and an inherent meaning to this totality.  We will not therefore fall prey to the objection that we made against Leibniz when we said: “Of course, Adam chose to take the apple, but he did not choose to be Adam.” For us, in fact, the problem of freedom is located at the level of Adam’s own choice of himself, i.e., the determination of essence by existence.  In addition, we acknowledge with Leibniz that another movement by Adam, implying another Adam, implies another world, but by “other world” we do not mean an organization of compossible things within which the other possible Adam might find his place: simply another aspect of the world will be revealed, corresponding to Adam’s other being-in-the-world.  Finally, for Leibniz, the possible movement of the other Adam, being organized within another possible world, preexists for all eternity—insofar as it is possible—the actualization of the contingent and real Adam.  Here too, for Leibniz, essence precedes existence, and the chronological order depends on the eternal order of logic.  For us, on the contrary, the possible is only a pure and formless possibility of being other, as long as it is not existed as possible by a new project of Adam’s, toward new possibilities.  Thus Leibniz’s possible eternally remains an abstract possible, whereas, in our view, a possible can appear only by possibilizing itself, i.e., by coming to tell Adam what he is.  In consequence, the order of psychological explanation in Leibniz goes from the past to the present, to just the extent to which this succession expresses the eternal order of essences; finally everything is frozen within logical eternity, and the only contingency is that of the principle which means that Adam is a postulate of the divine understanding.  For us, on the contrary, the order of interpretation is strictly chronological ; it does not seek in any way to reduce time to a succession that is purely logical ( reason ) or logico-chronological ( cause , determinism).  Interpretation is, therefore, on the basis of the future.  But what is especially worthy of emphasis is that the whole of our preceding analysis is purely theoretical .  It is only in theory that another movement by Adam is possible only within the limits of a total upheaval in the ends through which Adam chooses himself as Adam.  We have presented things in this way—and we may in so doing have appeared to be Leibnizian—in order to expound our view with the maximum of simplicity.  In fact the reality is far more complex.  The fact is that the order of interpretation is purely chronological and not logical: the understanding of an act on the basis of the original ends posited by the for-itself’s freedom is not an intellection .  And the descending hierarchy of possibles, from the ultimate and initial possible right down to the derived possible that we are trying to understand, has nothing in common with a deductive series that moves from a principle to its consequence.  In the first place, the connection between the derived possible (to stiffen oneself against one’s fatigue or to surrender to it) and the fundamental possible is not a connection of deducibility .  It is a connection between a totality and a partial structure.  The view of the total project enables us “to understand” the particular structure in question.  But the Gestaltists showed us that the stability of complete figures does not rule out the variability of certain secondary structures.  I am able to add or subtract various lines from a given figure without altering its specific character.  There are other lines, on the contrary, whose addition would immediately cause the figure to disappear, and another figure to appear.  The same thing holds with respect to the relation of secondary possibles to my fundamental possible, or to the formal totality of my possibles.  Of course, the meaning of any secondary possible that we examine always refers back to the total meaning that I am.  But other possibles might have replaced this one without the total meaning changing, which means they could still—and just as effectively—have referred to this totality as the figure that allows them to be understood—or, in the ontological order of their actualization, they might just as well have been projected as means to achieve the totality, and within the light of this totality.  In brief, to understand is to interpret a de facto connection, not to grasp a necessity.  In this way, the psychological interpretation of our acts will frequently recall the Stoic notion of “indifferents.” 26 To relieve my fatigue, it is indifferent whether I sit down at the side of the road or take a hundred steps further, in order to stop at the inn that I can see in the distance.  Therefore the apprehension of the complex and global figure that I have chosen as my ultimate possible is not sufficient to account for the choice of one of these possibles rather than the other.  What we have here is not an act without any motives or reasons but a spontaneous invention of motives and reasons which, even as it fits within the framework of my fundamental choice, thereby enriches it.  In the same way, each this must appear on the ground of the world and in the perspective of my facticity, but neither my facticity nor the world allows us to understand why I apprehend this glass now, rather than this inkwell, as a figure detaching itself against the ground.  In relation to these indifferents, our freedom is entire and unconditioned.  Moreover, this way of choosing one possible indifferent, and then abandoning it for another, will not make an instant arise as a break in duration: on the contrary, these free choices are all integrated—even if they are successive and contradictory—within the unity of my fundamental project.  This does not mean we should regard them as gratuitous: indeed, whatever they are, they will always be interpretable on the basis of the original choice and, to the extent that they enrich and concretize it, they will always bring their motive with them—i.e., the consciousness of their reason or, alternatively, the apprehension of the situation as being articulated in this or that way.  In addition, an accurate assessment of the connection between a secondary possible and the fundamental possible is made especially delicate by the fact that no a priori scale exists to which we might appeal to determine this connection.  Rather, and on the contrary, it is the for-itself himself who chooses to regard the secondary possible as signifying the fundamental possible.  Often, when we have the impression that the free subject is turning away from his fundamental goal, we are introducing an observer’s coefficient of error; in other words, we are making use of our own scales in order to assess the relation of the examined act to its ultimate ends.  But the for-itself, in its freedom, does not only invent its primary and secondary ends—it invents at the same time the entire system of interpretation that allows some of these to be connected with others.  In no circumstance, therefore, can there be any question of establishing a universal system for understanding secondary possibles on the basis of primary possibles; rather, in each case, the subject must provide his personal touchstones and his personal criteria.  Finally, the for-itself is able to take voluntary decisions that are opposed to its chosen fundamental ends.  These decisions can only be voluntary, i.e., reflective.  Effectively, they can result only from an error—committed in good or bad faith—about the ends I am pursuing, and this error can be made only if reflective consciousness encounters the set of motives that I am in the form of an object.  Unreflected consciousness, as the spontaneous projection of itself toward its possibilities, can never be wrong about itself: indeed, we need to be careful not to describe the errors we make in our assessment of the objective situation as “mistakes about ourselves”—errors which may lead to consequences within the world that are entirely opposed to those we wanted to achieve, even without any misrecognition of the proposed ends.  The reflective attitude, on the contrary, brings with it a thousand possibilities of error, not to the extent that it apprehends the pure motive—i.e., the reflected consciousness—as a quasi-object but insofar as it aims, through this reflected consciousness, to constitute real psychological objects which (as we saw in Chapter 3 of Part Two) are themselves merely probable objects, and which can even be false objects.  It is therefore possible, because of errors I have made about myself, for me to reflectively—i.e., voluntarily—impose on myself projects that contradict my initial project, without however fundamentally modifying my initial project.  This is how, for example, if my initial project aims to choose myself as inferior in the midst of others (the so-called inferiority complex) and if stammering, for example, is a behavior to be understood and interpreted on the basis of the first project, I may, for social reasons and through a failure to recognize my own choice of inferiority, decide to correct my stammer.  I may even manage it —without having ceased, however, to feel myself, and to want to be, inferior.  To obtain a result, I need only make use of technical means.  This is what we ordinarily call a voluntary reform of oneself.  But these results will only displace the disability from which I suffer: another will arise in its place, to express in its own way the total end I am pursuing.  As this profound inefficacy of a voluntary act directed on oneself may seem surprising, we should analyze our chosen example more closely.  We should note in the first place that, even though it is totally free, the choice of total ends is not necessarily, or even often, a joyful operation.  We should not confuse the necessity of our having to choose ourselves with the will to power.  Our choice may be made with resignation or unease; it may be a form of escape, or accomplished in bad faith.  We are able to choose ourselves as fleeing, evasive, hesitant, etc.: we may even choose not to choose ourselves; in these various cases, we posit our ends beyond a factual situation, and the responsibility for these ends falls on us; whatever our being is, it is a choice, and it depends on us to choose ourselves as “great” or “noble” or “low” and “humiliated.” But, precisely, if we have chosen humiliation as the very fabric of our being, we will actualize ourselves as humiliated, embittered, inferior, etc.  We are not dealing here with givens that lack any meaning.  But someone who actualizes himself as humiliated thereby constitutes himself as a means of attaining certain ends: the chosen humiliation may, for example, be equivalent—like masochism—to an instrument whose purpose is to rid us of our for-itself existence; it may be a project to renounce, in favor of others, our anguished freedom; our project may be to get our being-for-the-Other to absorb entirely our being-for-itself.  In any case, an “inferiority complex” can arise only if it is founded upon a free apprehension of our being-for-the-Other.  As a situation , this being-for-others will act like a reason , but for that to happen it must be revealed by a motive , which is nothing other than our free project.  Thus the inferiority which we feel and live out is the instrument we have chosen in order to make us resemble a thing , i.e., to make ourselves exist purely as an “outside” in the midst of the world.  But it goes without saying that it has to be lived in conformity with the nature that we confer on it through this choice, which is to say in shame, anger, and bitterness.  Thus to choose inferiority does not mean that we quietly settle for an aurea mediocritas ; 27 it is to produce and to accept the revolt and the despair constitutive of the revelation of this inferiority.  I may persist, for example, in exhibiting myself in a specific type of work and output because I am inferior at it, while in some other domain I might be able to reach the average without difficulty.  This is the unsuccessful endeavor I have chosen because it is unsuccessful: either because I prefer to come last—rather than to get lost in the crowd—or because I have chosen discouragement and shame as the best way to attain being .  But it goes without saying that I can only choose , as my field of action, the domain in which I am inferior if this choice implies a reflective will to be superior at it.  To choose to be an inferior artist is necessarily to choose to want to be a great artist; otherwise the inferiority would be neither undergone nor acknowledged: indeed, to choose to be a modest artisan does not imply the pursuit of inferiority at all; it is simply one example of the choice of finitude.  The choice of inferiority, on the contrary, implies the constant actualization of a gap between the end pursued by the will and the end that is obtained.  The artist who wishes to be great and who chooses himself as inferior intentionally maintains this gap; he is like Penelope, and destroys at night what he does during the day.  In this sense he constantly remains, in his artistic productions, at the level of the will and accordingly manifests a desperate energy.  But his will is itself in bad faith , which is to say that it flees the acknowledgment of the true ends chosen by spontaneous consciousness and constitutes false psychological objects in the form of motives in order to be able to deliberate about these motives and to decide on their basis (the love of glory, the love of the beautiful, etc.).  Here the will is not at all opposed to the fundamental choice but, quite to the contrary, it can only be understood in its goals and in the principle of its bad faith, within the perspective of the fundamental choice of inferiority.  Better still, if—in its capacity as reflective consciousness—it constitutes in bad faith false psychological objects in the form of motives, in its capacity as an unreflected and non-thetic consciousness (of) self, it is on the contrary a consciousness (of) being in bad faith and therefore a consciousness (of) the fundamental project pursued by the for-itself.  In this way the divorce between the spontaneous consciousness and the will is not a factual given which is merely observed.  But, on the contrary, this duality is initially projected and brought about by our fundamental freedom; it can be conceived only in and through the deep unity of our fundamental project, which is to choose ourselves as inferior.  But this divorce, precisely, implies that the voluntary deliberation decides with bad faith to compensate for or to conceal our inferiority by means of tasks whose basic goal is to enable us on the contrary to measure this inferiority.  Thus, as we see, our analysis allows us to accept the two levels at which Adler situates the inferiority complex: like him, we accept a fundamental acknowledgment of this inferiority and, like him, we accept a dense and ill-balanced development of acts, works, and affirmations whose purpose is to compensate for or conceal this deep feeling.  But: (1) We refuse to conceive of the fundamental acknowledgment as unconscious: so far from being unconscious is it that it even constitutes the bad faith of the will.  We do not on this account place, between the two levels we are envisaging, the difference between the unconscious and the conscious but rather the difference which separates the unreflected and fundamental consciousness from the reflective consciousness which depends on it.  (2) It seems to us that the concept of bad faith—as we established in Part One—ought to replace the concepts of censure, repression and unconscious which Adler uses.  (3) The unity of consciousness, as it is revealed to the cogito , is too deep for us to accept this split into two levels unless it is taken up by a deeper synthetic intention which leads back one level to the other and unifies them.  So we grasp an additional meaning in the inferiority complex: not only is the inferiority complex acknowledged but this acknowledgment is a choice ; the will does not only try to conceal this inferiority by means of weak and unstable affirmations but a deeper intention runs through it which chooses precisely the weakness and instability of these affirmations, with the intention of making this inferiority—which we aspire to flee and which we will experience in shame and with the feeling of failure—more visible.  In this way the person who suffers from “ Mindwertigkeit ” 28 has chosen to be his own executioner.  He has chosen shame and suffering, which does not mean (it is quite the opposite) that he is obliged to feel joy when they come into being with the utmost violence.  But, for all that they are chosen in bad faith by a will that produces itself within the limits of our initial project, it is no less true that these new possibles are actualized, to a certain extent, against the initial project.  To the extent that we want to conceal our inferiority from ourselves, precisely in order to create it, we may want to eliminate our timidity and our stammering, which manifest at the level of spontaneity our initial inferiority project.  In that case we will make a systematic and reflective effort to make these manifestations disappear.  We make this attempt in the state of mind that is characteristic of the patients who come to seek psychoanalysis.  In other words we try, on the one hand, to actualize something which, on the other hand, we refuse: in this way the patient voluntarily decides to seek out the psychoanalyst in order to be cured of certain disturbances that he is no longer able to hide from himself—and, merely on account of placing himself within the doctor’s hands, he runs the risk of being cured.  But on the other hand, if he runs this risk, it is in order to persuade himself that he has done everything to be cured to no avail and, therefore, that he is incurable.  He approaches the psychoanalytic treatment therefore with bad faith and a bad will.  The goal of all his efforts will be to make him fail, even while he continues voluntarily to participate.  Similarly, the psychaesthenics studied by Janet suffer from an obsession they intentionally maintain, and want to be cured of it.  But their will to be cured of it has precisely as its goal to affirm these obsessions as sufferings and in consequence to actualize them in all their violence.  We know the rest: the patient is unable to own up to his obsessions; he rolls on the ground, and he sobs, but he does not decide to make the required confession.  It would be pointless here to talk about a struggle of the will against the illness: these processes take place within the ecstatic unity of bad faith, in a being who is what he is not and who is not what he is.  Similarly, when the psychoanalyst is close to grasping the patient’s initial project, the latter gives up treatment or begins to lie.  It will be fruitless to explain these resistances by an unconscious rebellion or anxiety: How in that case could the unconscious be informed of the progress of the psychoanalytic inquiry, unless it were precisely a consciousness? But if the patient plays the game right to the end, he will have to undergo a partial cure, which is to say that he will have to cause the disappearance within him of the morbid phenomena which led him to request the doctor’s help.  In this way he will have chosen the lesser evil: having come in order to persuade himself that he is incurable, he is obliged—in order to avoid bringing his project to light and, in consequence, nihilating it and freely becoming other—to start anew by playing at the cure.  Similarly, the methods that I use to cure myself of stammering and timidity may have been tried in bad faith.  It remains no less the case that I may be obliged to acknowledge their efficacy.  In this case the timidity and stammering will disappear: this is the lesser evil.  An artificial and voluble self-confidence will come to replace them.  But these cures are like the cure for hysteria by electric treatment.  We know that this medication may lead a hysterical spasm in the leg to disappear but that, sometime later, we see the spasm reappearing in the arm.  The fact is that the cure for hysteria can only come about in its totality, because hysteria is a totalizing project of the for-itself.  Partial medications will only displace its manifestations.  In this way the cure for timidity or stammering is consented to and chosen within a project which leads to the occurrence of other disturbances—for example, precisely, to the occurrence of an empty and similarly unbalanced self-confidence.  As in fact the motive through which a voluntary decision arises is found within the free fundamental choice of my ends, this decision can attack these very ends only in appearance; it is therefore only within the framework of my fundamental project that the will can be efficacious; and I can only “get rid of” my “inferiority complex” through a radical modification of my project, for which the reasons and motives can in no way be found in the previous project, not even in the sufferings and shame that I experience, because these latter have as their explicit purpose to actualize my inferiority project.  Thus, for as long as I remain “in” the inferiority complex, I cannot even conceive that I might get out of it, because, even if I dream of getting out of it, this dream has its precise function, which is to allow me to experience still further the abjection of my state; it can therefore only be interpreted in, and through, the intention to be inferior.  And yet, at each moment, I apprehend this initial choice as contingent and unjustifiable; at each moment, therefore, I am well placed to suddenly envisage it objectively and, in consequence, to surpass it and to pastify it by making the liberating instant appear.  This explains my anguish, the fear that I have of suddenly being exorcised, i.e., of becoming radically other; but it also explains the frequent occurrence of “conversions” that lead me to transform totally my original project.  These conversions, which philosophers have not studied, have often, on the contrary, inspired literary writers.  Let us recall the instant in which Gide’s Philoctetes 29 even gives up his hatred, his fundamental project, his raison d’être, and his being; recall the instant in which Raskolnikov decides to give himself up.  30 These extraordinary and marvelous instants, in which the earlier project collapses into the past in the light of a new project which arises on its ruins and which is still only being sketched out, in which humiliation, anguish, joy, and hope are tightly blended, in which we let go in order to take hold and take hold in order to let go, have often seemed to provide the clearest and most moving image of our freedom.  But they are just one of its manifestations among others.  Presented like this, the “paradox” of the inefficacy of voluntary decisions will seem less offensive.  It amounts to saying that, through our will, we are able to construct ourselves entirely, but that the meaning of the will that governs this construction is itself to be found in the original project that it may appear to negate and, consequently, that this structure has a function that is quite different from the one it makes public and, finally, that it can never modify the original project from which it derives, any more than the consequences of a theorem can be turned back against it and change it.  At the end of this long discussion, we appear to have succeeded in making our ontological understanding of freedom a little clearer.  We should now gather up the various results we have obtained into a single overview.  (1) A first look at human-reality informs us that, in its case, being can be reduced to doing.  The nineteenth-century psychologists who pointed out the motor structures of tendencies, attention, perception, etc., were right.  Only movement itself is an act.  Thus we do not find anything given in human-reality, in the sense in which temperament, character, the passions, and the principles of reason could be acquired or innate data , existing in the manner of things.  On its own, an empirical examination of human-being shows it to be an organized unity of modes of behavior or “comportments.” 31 To be ambitious, cowardly, or irascible is simply to behave in some particular way, in some particular circumstances.  The behaviorists were right to hold that positive psychology should consist only in the study of modes of behavior in strictly defined situations.  Just as the works of Janet and the Gestaltists have equipped us to uncover emotional behavior, so we should talk in the same way about perceptual behavior, since we can never conceive of perception apart from an attitude in relation to the world.  Even the scholar’s disinterested attitude, as Heidegger showed, takes up a disinterested position in relation to the world and is, in consequence, one mode of behavior among others.  Thus human-reality does not exist first in order to act, but being, in its case, is acting, and to cease to act is to cease to be.  (2) But if human-reality is action, it evidently follows that the determining of its action is itself an action.  If we reject this principle, and if we accept an earlier state of the world or of itself can determine it to act, that amounts to placing something given at the origin of the series.  In that case these acts disappear as acts, to make way for a series of movements .  That is how the notion of behavior in Janet and the behaviorists destroys itself.  The existence of an act implies its autonomy.  (3) Moreover, if an act is not just movement , it must be defined by means of an intention .  This intention, however we regard it, can only be something that surpasses the given toward a result to be obtained.  This given, indeed, being pure presence, is unable to move out of itself.  Precisely because it is, it is what it is, fully and uniquely.  It cannot therefore do justice to a phenomenon which gets all its meaning from a result to be attained, i.e., a nonexistent.  For example, when psychologists make a tendency into a factual state, they fail to see that they are removing all its character as an appetite ( ad-petitio ) from it.  If in fact the sexual tendency may be differentiated from sleep, for example, it can only be by means of its end, and this end, precisely, is not.  The psychologists ought to have asked themselves what sort of ontological structure could belong to a phenomenon that is acquainted with what it is by something that has not yet come to be.  Intention, which is the fundamental structure of human-reality, cannot therefore in any case be explained by a given, even if we claim that it emanates from it.  But if we want to interpret it through its end, we must take care not to confer on this end the existence of a given .  If we were able to accept, indeed, that the end is given prior to the effort to attain it, we would have to grant a sort of being-in-itself to this end, at the heart of its nothingness, and a power to attract of a distinctively magical type.  Besides, we would have no more success in understanding the connection of a given human-reality with an end given separately than the connection, in realist theories, between the consciousness-substance and the reality-substance.  If the tendency or the act must be interpreted by its end, it is because the structure of intention is to posit its end outside it.  In this way the intention, by choosing the end that announces it, makes itself be.  (4) Since the intention is a choice of the end and the world is revealed through our behavior, it is the intentional choice of the end which reveals the world, and the world reveals itself this way or that (in this order or that) according to the chosen end.  The end, which lights up the world, is a state of the world to be obtained, and not already in existence.  The intention is a thetic consciousness of the end.  But it can be that only by becoming a non-thetic consciousness of its own possibility.  Thus my end may be a good meal, if I am hungry.  But this meal, projected, beyond the dusty road along which I am making my way, as this road’s meaning 32 (it goes toward a hotel where the table is laid, the dishes are ready, they are waiting for me, etc.), can only be grasped as the correlative of my non-thetic project toward my own possibility of eating this meal.  In this way, through its twofold but unitary arising, the intention lights up the world on the basis of an end that does not yet exist and which defines itself through the choice of its possible.  My end is a specific objective state of the world, and my possible is a specific structure of my subjectivity; the first of these is revealed to thetic consciousness, while the other flows back on to non-thetic consciousness in order to characterize it.  (5) If intention cannot be explained by the given, it must—simply by arising—actualize a break with what is given, no matter what that is.  It could not be otherwise, or we would have a present plenitude following, with no break in continuity, a present plenitude, and we would not be able to prefigure the future.  For that matter, this break is necessary for the given to be assessed .  If it were not assessed, the given could never in fact be a reason for action.  But this assessment can only be achieved by our withdrawing from the given, by a bracketing of the given, which presupposes just such a break in continuity.  Furthermore, the assessment, if it is not to be gratuitous, must be made in the light of something.  And this something which is used to assess the given can only be the end.  Thus the intention, in a single unitary arising, posits the end, chooses itself, and assesses the given on the basis of the end.  In these conditions the given is assessed relatively to something which does not yet exist; being-in-itself is lit up by the light of non-being.  The result is the coloring of the given in a double nihilation: on the one hand the given is nihilated insofar as, through the break that is made with it, it loses all efficacy in relation to the intention; on the other hand it undergoes a new nihilation by virtue of the efficacy that is returned to it on the basis of a nothingness, its assessment.  As human-reality is an act, we can conceive of it only as a break in its being with the given.  It is the being that makes it the case that there is any given, by breaking with it and illuminating it in the light of the not-yet-existing.  (6) This necessity—that the given can appear only within the framework of a nihilation which reveals it—is one and the same as the internal negation that we described in Part Two.  It would be pointless to imagine that consciousness might exist without any given: in that case it would be conscious (of) itself as a consciousness of nothing, i.e., absolute nothingness.  But if consciousness exists on the basis of the given, that does not at all mean that it is conditioned by the given: it is purely and simply a negation of the given; it exists as disengaged from a specific existing given and committed toward a specific end that does not yet exist.  But, in addition, this internal negation can only belong to a being that constantly withdraws from itself.  If it were not its own negation it would be what it is, i.e., a pure and simple given.  It would not thereby have any connection with any other datum , since the given, in essence, is only what it is.  Any possibility of a world appearing would, therefore, be ruled out.  In order not to be a given, the for-itself must constantly constitute itself as stepping back from itself, i.e., as leaving itself behind, as a datum that it no longer is.  From this characteristic, it follows that the for-itself is the being for whom there is no rescue , and no support , in what it was .  But, on the contrary, the for-itself is free, and it can make it the case that there is a world, because it is the being that has to be what it was in the light of what it will be .  The for-itself’s freedom appears therefore as its being .  But as this freedom is not a given, or a property, it can be only by choosing itself.  The for-itself’s freedom is always committed : the freedom in question here bears no relation to some undetermined power, able to preexist its choice.  We only ever apprehend ourselves as a choice in its making.  But freedom is simply the fact that this choice is always unconditioned.  (7) A choice like this, made in the absence of any support, and which dictates its motives to itself, may appear absurd —and indeed it is.  The fact is that freedom is the choice of its being, but not the foundation of its being.  We will return to this relation between freedom and facticity in the present chapter.  For now, it is enough to say that human-reality can choose itself as it wishes but it cannot not choose itself; it cannot even refuse to be; indeed suicide is a choice, and an affirmation of being.  Through this being that is given to it, human-reality participates in the universal contingency of being and, thereby, in what we have called “absurdity.” This choice is absurd, not because it lacks any reason but because there was no possibility of not choosing.  Whatever it is, the choice is founded and repossessed by being, because it is a choice that is.  But we must note here that this choice is not absurd in the sense in which, in a rational universe, a phenomenon might arise that was not connected to other phenomena by any reasons .  The sense in which choice is absurd is that it is the means through which any foundation and any reasons arrive in being, and through which the very notion of absurdity acquires its meaning.  It is absurd insofar as it lies beyond all reasons.  Freedom, therefore, is not purely and simply contingent, insofar as it turns back toward its being, to illuminate it in the light of its end: freedom constantly escapes contingency; it internalizes, nihilates, and subjectivizes its contingency, which, thus modified, passes over entirely into gratuitous choice.  (8) The free project is fundamental, because it is my being.  We cannot regard ambition, or a yearning to be loved, or an inferiority complex, as fundamental projects.  On the contrary, these need to be understood on the basis of a first and total project—which can be identified by our inability to interpret it any further on the basis of any other project.  To explicate this initial project, a special phenomenological method will be necessary, that we will call “existential psychoanalysis.” We will discuss it in the next chapter.  For now, we can say that the fundamental project that I am does not concern my relations with this or that particular object in the world but my being-in-the-world as a whole, and—since the world itself is revealed only in the light of an end—this project posits as its end a specific kind of relation to being, which the for-itself wants to maintain.  This project is not instantaneous, because it cannot be “in” time.  Neither is it timeless, in order afterward to “allow some time for itself.” 33 That is why we reject Kant’s “choice of intelligible character.” 34 The structure of the choice necessarily implies that it is a choice in the world.  A choice that was a choice on the basis of nothing , a choice against nothing , would not be a choice of anything, and would be annihilated as a choice.  Choice can only be phenomenal—so long, however, as we understand this to mean that the phenomenon, here, is the absolute.  But the choice temporalizes itself even as it arises, since it makes it the case that a future approaches, to illuminate the present and to constitute it as the present by assigning the meaning of pastness to the in-itself “data.” However, we should not understand this to mean that the fundamental project is coextensive with the for-itself’s entire “life.” Since freedom is a being-without-a-support and without-a-springboard, the project must constantly renew itself in order to be.  I am perpetually choosing myself and I can never be described as having-been-chosen, or I would collapse back into the pure and simple existence of the in-itself.  The necessity of my constantly choosing myself is one and the same thing as the pursued-pursuit that I am.  But precisely because it is a matter of a choice , this choice, insofar as it takes place, designates other choices in general as possibles.  The possibility of these other choices is not explicated or posited but it is lived through with a feeling of unjustifiability, which is expressed by the absurdity of my choice and, in consequence, of my being.  Thus my freedom eats into my freedom.  In being free, in fact, I project my total possible, but I thereby posit that I am free and that I can always nihilate this first project and make it past.  35 Thus, in the moment when the for-itself thinks it is grasping itself and becoming acquainted—through a pro-jected nothingness—with what it is , it is escaping itself, because it thereby posits that it can be other than it is.  It needs only to explicate its unjustifiability for the instant to arise, i.e., the appearance of a new project as the former project collapses.  However, since an explicit condition of this new project’s arising is the nihilation of the former project, the for-itself is not able to confer upon itself a new existence: the moment it pushes its discontinued project back into the past, it has this project—in the form of “was”—to be.  In other words, this discontinued project belongs henceforth to its situation.  No law of being can assign a number, a priori , to the various projects that I am: in point of fact, the for-itself’s existence conditions its essence.  But we must consult each for-itself’s history in order to form, in relation to each particular for-itself, a particular idea.  Our particular projects concerning the actualization within the world of some particular end are integrated within the global project that we are.  But, precisely because we are entirely choice and act, our global project does not determine these partial projects: they must themselves be choices, and a certain margin of contingency, unpredictability, and absurdity characterizes each of them, even while each project, insofar as it projects itself, is always to be understood in relation to my being-in-the-world in its totality, insofar as it is a specification of the global project in the circumstance of particular elements of my situation.  With these observations, we believe we have described the for-itself’s freedom in its original existence.  But the reader will have noted that this freedom requires a given—not as its condition but on a number of counts: first of all, freedom can be conceived of only as the nihilation of a given (5) and, to the extent that it is an internal negation and consciousness, freedom falls under (6) the necessity that requires consciousness to be conscious of something.  In addition, freedom is the freedom to choose—but not the freedom not to choose.  Not to choose is, in fact, to choose not to choose.  It follows that choice provides the foundation of chosen-being but not the foundation of the choosing.  This gives rise to the absurdity (7) of freedom.  Here, again, we are directed to something given, which is nothing but the for-itself’s very facticity.  Finally, the global project, even though it lights up the world in its totality, may become specified in the context of this or that element of the situation and, in consequence, of the world’s contingency.  All these remarks, therefore, refer us to a difficult problem: the problem of the relations between freedom and facticity.  And, furthermore, they bring into view the material objections that we are sure to be challenged with: Can I choose to be tall if I am short? To have two arms if I am maimed? etc.—objections that are concerned, precisely, with the “limits” that my factual situation might be thought to place on my free choice of myself.  We ought therefore to examine freedom’s other aspect, its “reverse side”: its relation with facticity.  Being and Nothingness Being and Nothingness First published in French in 1943, Jean-Paul Sartre’s L’Être et le Néant is one of the greatest philosophical works of the twentieth century.  In it, Sartre offers nothing less than a brilliant and radical account of the human condition.  The English philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch wrote to a friend of “the excitement—I remember nothing like it since the days of discovering Keats and Shelley and Coleridge.” This new translation, the first for over sixty years, makes this classic work of philosophy available to a new generation of readers.  What gives our lives significance, Sartre argues in Being and Nothingness, is not preestablished for us by God or nature but is something for which we ourselves are responsible.  At the heart of this view are Sartre’s radical conceptions of consciousness and freedom.  Far from being an internal, passive container for our thoughts and experiences, human consciousness is constantly projecting itself into the outside world and imbuing it with meaning.  Combining this with the unsettling view that human existence is characterized by radical freedom and the inescapability of choice, Sartre introduces us to a cast of ideas and characters that are part of philosophical legend: anguish; the “bad faith” of the memorable waiter in the café; sexual desire; and the “look” of the other, brought to life by Sartre’s famous description of someone looking through a keyhole.  Above all, by arguing that we alone create our values and that human relationships are characterized by hopeless conflict, Sartre paints a stark and controversial picture of our moral universe and one that resonates strongly today.  This new translation includes an insightful Translator’s Introduction, helpful discussion of key decisions, numerous explanatory footnotes, an index, and a Foreword by Richard Moran, Brian D.  Young Professor of Philosophy, Harvard University, USA.  Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) was one of the great philosophers of the twentieth century and a renowned novelist, dramatist, and political activist.  As a teenager Sartre was drawn to philosophy after reading Henri Bergson’s Time and Free Will .  He passed the agrégation in philosophy at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris in 1929.  His first novel La Nausée , which Sartre considered one of his best works, was published in 1938.  Sartre served as a meteorologist in the French army before being captured by German troops in 1940, spending nine months as a prisoner of war.  He continued to write during his captivity and, after his release, published his great trilogy of novels, Les Chemins de la Liberté.  In 1964, Sartre was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature but declined it.  During the events of 1968 he was arrested for civil disobedience but swiftly released by President Charles de Gaulle, who allegedly said, “One does not arrest Voltaire.” He died on April 15, 1980, in Paris, his funeral attracting an enormous crowd of up to 50,000 mourners.  He is buried in the Cimetière du Montparnasse in Paris.  Translated by Sarah Richmond, University College London, UK.  Bibliography B IBLIOGRAPHY Abraham, Pierre (1930), Proust: Recherches sur la Création Intellectuelle (Paris: Rieder).  Amiel, Henri Frédéric (1921), Amiel’s Journal , trans.  Mary Ward (London: Macmillan).  Bachelard, Gaston (1983), Water and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination of Matter , trans.  Edith Farrell (Dallas: Dallas Institute of Humanities and Culture).  Bacon, Francis (1985), The Essays , ed.  John Pitcher (Harmondsworth: Penguin).  Balzac, Honoré de (1972), The Chouans , trans.  Marion Ayton Crawford (Harmondsworth: Penguin).  Berger, Gaston (1972), The Cogito in Husserl’s Philosophy , trans.  Kathleen McLaughlin (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).  Bergson, Henri (1911a), Creative Evolution , trans.  Arthur Mitchell (New York: Henry Holt).  Bergson, Henri (1911b), Matter and Memory , trans.  Nancy Margaret Paul and W.  Scott Palmer (London: George Allen & Unwin).  Bergson, Henri (1960), Time and Free Will , trans.  F.  L.  Pogson (New York: Harper & Row).  Chamfort, Nicolas (1969), Products of the Perfected Civilisation: Selected Writings of Chamfort , trans.  W.  S.  Merwin (New York: Macmillan).  Claudel, Paul (1931), The Satin Slipper , trans.  John O’Connor (London: Sheed & Ward).  Corneille, Pierre (2012), Le Cid , trans.  John C.  Lapp (Wheeling, Ill.: Harlan Davidson, Crofts Classics).  Descartes, René (1911), Discourse on Method , trans.  S.  Haldane and G.  R.  T.  Ross (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Descartes, René (1983), Principles of Philosophy , trans.  V.  R.  Miller and R.  P.  Miller (Dordrecht: Kluwer).  Descartes, René (1989), The Passions of the Soul , trans.  S.  Voss (Indianapolis: Hackett).  Descartes, René (1996), Meditations on First Philosophy: With Selections from the Objections and Replies , ed.  John Cottingham and Bernard Williams (New York: Cambridge University Press).  Dostoyevsky, Fyodor (1992), Crime and Punishment , trans.  R.  Pevear and L.  Volokhonsky (London: Vintage Classics).  Durkheim, Émile, and Mauss, Marcel (2010), Primitive Classification , trans.  Rodney Needham (Abingdon: Routledge).  Faulkner, William (2005), Light in August (London: Vintage).  Gide, André (1949), Fruits of the Earth , trans.  D.  Bussy (New York: Knopf).  Gide, André (1990), The Counterfeiters , trans.  D.  Bussy (London: Penguin).  Gide, André (2000), Journals 1889–1913 , trans.  J.  O’Brien (Urbana: University of Illinois Press).  Gide, André (2007), Strait Is the Gate , trans.  D.  Bussy (New York: Mondial).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (1977), Phenomenology of Spirit , trans.  A.  V.  Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (1986), The Philosophical Propaedeutic , trans.  A.  V.  Miller, ed.  M.  George and A.  Vincent (Oxford: Blackwell).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (1991), The Encyclopaedia Logic , trans.  and ed.  T.  F.  Geraets, W.  A.  Suchtung and H.  S.  Harris (Indianapolis: Hackett).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (1995), Morceaux Choisis , trans.  H.  Lefebvre and N.  Guterman (Paris: Gallimard Folio).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (2010), The Science of Logic , trans.  and ed.  George di Giovanni (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Heidegger, Martin (1938), Qu’est-ce que la Métaphysique? Suivi d’Extraits sur l’Être et le Temps et d’une Conference sur Hölderlin , trans.  Henry Corbin (Paris: Gallimard).  Heidegger, Martin (1938a), “Qu’est-ce que la Métaphysique?,” in Heidegger (1938).  Heidegger, Martin (1938b), “Ce qui Fait l’Être-Essentiel d’un Fondement ou ‘Raison,’ ” in Heidegger (1938).  Heidegger, Martin (1938c), “Extraits du Livre sur l’Être et le Temps,” in Heidegger (1938).  Heidegger, Martin (1969), The Essence of Reasons , trans.  Terrence Malick (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).  Heidegger, Martin (1978a), Basic Writings , trans.  David Krell (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).  Heidegger, Martin (1978b), “Letter on Humanism,” trans.  David Krell, in Heidegger (1978a): 193–242.  Heidegger, Martin (1978c), “What Is Metaphysics?,” trans.  David Krell, in Heidegger (1978a): 95–112.  Heidegger, Martin (1980), Being and Time , trans.  J.  Macquarrie and E.  Robinson (Oxford: Blackwell).  Heidegger, Martin (2000), Elucidations of Hölderlin’s Poetry , trans.  Keith Hoeller (New York: Humanity Books).  Heidegger, Martin (2010), Being and Time , trans.  J.  Stambaugh (revised edition) (New York: SUNY Press).  Hemingway, Ernest (2003), Death in the Afternoon (New York: Charles Scribner).  Husserl, Edmund (1960), Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology , trans.  Dorion Cairns (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff).  Husserl, Edmund (1983), Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , First Book, trans.  F.  Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff).  Husserl, Edmund (1991), On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time , trans.  J.  B.  Brough (Dordrecht: Kluwer).  Husserl, Edmund (2001), Logical Investigations , trans.  J.  Findlay (Abingdon: Routledge).  Jaspers, Karl (1963), General Psychopathology , trans.  J.  Hoenig and M.  W.  Hamilton (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).  Joyce, James (1960), Ulysses (London: Bodley Head).  Kafka, Franz (1994), The Trial , trans.  Idris Parry (London: Penguin).  Kafka, Franz (2009), The Castle , trans.  Anthea Bell (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Kant, Immanuel (1998), Critique of Pure Reason , trans.  and ed.  P.  Guyer and A.  Wood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Kierkegaard, SØren (2013), Fear and Trembling, and The Sickness unto Death , trans.  Walter Lowrie (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).  Laclos, Pierre Choderlos de (1995), Les Liaisons Dangereuses , trans.  Douglas Parmée (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1967), The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspondence , trans.  and ed.  H.T.  Mason (Manchester: Manchester University Press).  Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (2014), Leibniz’s Monadology: A New Translation and Guide , trans.  Lloyd Strickland (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press).  Lot, Ferdinand (1931), The End of the Ancient World , trans.  Philip and Mariette Leon (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul).  Malebranche, Nicolas (1997), The Search after Truth, and Elucidations of The Search after Truth , trans.  and ed.  Thomas M.  Lennon and Paul J.  Olscamp (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Mallarmé, Stéphane (1996), Collected Poems: A Bilingual Edition , trans.  Henry Weinfeld (Berkeley: University of California Press).  Malraux, André (1970), Days of Hope , trans.  Stuart Gilbert and Alastair Macdonald (Harmondsworth: Penguin).  Malraux, André (1990), Man’s Fate , trans.  Haakon Chevalier (New York: Vintage).  Malraux, André (1991), The Conquerors, trans.  Stephen Becker (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).  Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1942), La Structure du Comportement (Paris: PUF).  Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1963), The Structure of Behavior , trans.  Alden Fisher (Boston: Beacon Press).  Meyerson, Emile (1991), The Explanation of the Sciences , trans.  Mary-Alice and David A.  Sipfle (Dordrecht: Kluwer).  Mill, John Stuart (1963–91), The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill , ed.  John M.  Robson (Toronto: University of Toronto Press).  Nietzsche, Friedrich (2009), Ecce Homo: How One Becomes What One Is , trans.  Duncan Large (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Pascal, Blaise (1995), Pensées , trans.  A.  J.  Krailsheimer (Harmondsworth: Penguin).  Paulhan, Jean (2006), The Flowers of Tarbes, or Terror in Literature , trans.  Michael Syrotinski (Champaign: University of Illinois Press).  Plato (1997), Complete Works , ed.  John M.  Cooper and D.  S.  Hutchinson (Indianapolis: Hackett).  Plato (2015), Theaetetus and Sophist , ed.  and trans.  Christopher Rowe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Proust, Marcel (2005), Swann’s Way , trans.  C.  K.  Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin, with revisions by D.  J.  Enright (London: Vintage).  Romains, Jules (1933–1947), Men of Good Will (14 vols), trans.  W.  Wells and G.  Hopkins (New York: Knopf).  Rougemont, Denis de (1944), The Devil’s Share , trans.  Haakon Chevalier (New York: Pantheon Books).  Rougemont, Denis de (1983), Love in the Western World , trans.  Montgomery Belgion (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).  Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (2002), The Social Contract, and The First and Second Discourses , ed.  Susan Dunn (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press).  Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (2008), Confessions , trans.  Angela Scholar (Oxford: Oxford University Press).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1943), L’Être et le Néant (Paris: Gallimard).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1965), Being and Nothingness , trans.  and introduced by Hazel Barnes (New York: Washington Square Press).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1970), “Intentionality: A Fundamental Idea of Husserl’s Philosophy,” trans.  Joseph Fell, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology , 1 (2): 4–5.  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1973), Existentialism and Humanism , trans.  Philip Mairet (London: Methuen).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1992), Being and Nothingness , trans.  and introduced by Hazel E.  Barnes (New York: Washington Square Press).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1994), Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions , trans.  Philip Mairet (London: Routledge).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (2000), Words , trans.  Irene Clephane (Harmondsworth: Penguin).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (2004a), The Transcendence of the Ego , trans.  Andrew Brown (Abingdon: Routledge).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (2004b), The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination , trans.  J.  Webber (London: Routledge).  Sartre, Jean-Paul (2012), Imagination , trans.  Kenneth Williford and David Rudrauf (Abingdon: Routledge).  Scheler, Max (1973), Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values , trans.  and ed.  M.  S.  Frings and R.  L.  Funk (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press).  Scheler, Max (2003), Ressentiment , trans.  Lewis Coser and William Holdheim (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press).  Schopenhauer, Arthur (2008), The World as Will and Presentation , Vol.  1, trans.  Richard E.  Aquila and David Carus (New York: Pearson Longman).  Sophocles (2008), Electra and Other Plays , trans.  David Raeburn (London: Penguin).  Spinoza, Baruch (1985), The Collected Writings of Spinoza , Vol.  1, trans.  Edwin Curley (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).  Stekel, Wilhelm (1953), Frigidity in Woman (2 vols), trans.  James Van Teslaar (London: Vision).  Stendhal (2009), On Love , trans.  Sophie Lewis (London: Hesperus).  Valéry, Paul (1950), Selected Writings (New York: New Directions).  Valéry, Paul (2007), Charms, and Other Pieces , trans.  Peter Dale (London: Anvil Press Poetry).  Chapter 2: The Body Chapter 2 GT342 THE BODY The problem of the body and its relations to consciousness is often obscured by the fact that we posit the body right from the start as a certain thing , possessed of its own laws and capable of being defined from the outside, while we reach consciousness through the type of inner intuition that is distinctive to it.  If, in effect, after having apprehended “ my ” consciousness in its absolute interiority, and through a series of reflective acts, I try to join it to a certain living object, constituted by a nervous system, a brain, some glands, some digestive, respiratory, and circulatory organs, whose very matter lends itself to being chemically analyzed into atoms of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, etc., I will encounter insurmountable difficulties: but these difficulties stem from the fact that I am not trying to join my consciousness to my body but to the body of others .  In effect, the body whose description I have just sketched is not my body, as it is for me .  I have never seen and never will see my brain, or my endocrine glands.  But, quite simply, because I who am a man have seen men’s corpses dissected, and because I have read physiological tracts, I conclude that my body is constituted exactly like all those I have been shown on a dissection table or whose representation in color I have looked at in books.  Of course, I will be told that the doctors who have treated me, the surgeons who have operated on me, have been able to experience directly this body that I do not know myself.  I do not deny this, and I am not claiming that I lack a brain, a heart, or a stomach.  But, before anything else, it is important to choose the order of our elements of knowledge: to start out from the experiences that doctors have had of my body is to start out from my body in the midst of the world , and as it is for the Other.  My body as it is for me does not appear to me in the midst of the world.  Of course, I have myself been able to see on a screen, in the course of an X-ray, the image of my vertebrae, but I was precisely outside , in the midst of the world: I was apprehending an entirely constituted object, as a this among other thises , and it is only through a process of reasoning that I could lead it back to being mine : it was far more my property than my being .  It is true that I can see and touch my legs and my hands.  And nothing stops me from conceiving of some sensory arrangement such that a living being could see one of his eyes, while the eye that was being seen directed its own gaze upon the world.  But we need to note that, in this case again, I am the other in relation to my eye: I apprehend it as a sensory organ constituted in such and such a way within the world, but I cannot “see it seeing,” which is to say I cannot apprehend it insofar as it reveals an aspect of the world to me.  Either it is a thing among things, or it is that through which things are disclosed to me.  But it cannot be both at the same time.  Similarly, I can see my hand touching objects, but I do not know it, in its act of touching them.  That is the reason why, necessarily, Maine de Biran’s famous “sensation of effort” does not really exist.  For my hand reveals to me the resistance of objects, their hardness or their softness, but it does not reveal itself .  In this way, I see my hand no differently from the way I see this inkwell.  I unfold a distance from me to it, and this distance becomes integrated with the distances that I establish between all the worldly objects.  When a doctor takes my bad leg and examines it, while I, semi-upright in my bed, watch him do this, there is no difference of kind between the visual perception that I have of the doctor’s body and the one I have of my own leg.  Better still, they differ only to the extent that they are different structures within a single global perception; and there is no difference in kind between the perception that the doctor has of my leg and the one I myself am presently having of it.  Of course, when I touch my leg with my finger, I feel that my leg is being touched.  But this phenomenon of double sensation is not essential: the cold, or a morphine injection, can make it disappear; that suffices to show that we are dealing with two essentially different orders of reality.  To touch and to be touched, to feel that one is touching and to feel that one is touched, these are two species of phenomena that, try as one might, cannot be joined together in the so-called double sensation.  In fact they are radically distinct, and they exist on two incommunicable levels.  Moreover, when I touch my leg, or I see it, I surpass it toward my own possibilities; it is, for example, in order to put on my trousers, or to redo the dressing around my wound.  And of course I am able at the same time to arrange my leg in such a way as to allow me to “work” on it more comfortably.  But that in no way changes the fact that I transcend it toward the pure possibility of “getting better” and that, in consequence, I am present to it without it being me , and without me being it .  And what I am in this way bringing to be is the “leg” thing ; it is not the leg as the possibility that I am of walking, of running, or of playing football.  Thus, to the extent to which my body indicates my possibilities in the world, to see it or to touch it is to transform these possibilities that are mine into dead-possibilities.  This metamorphosis necessarily has to bring in its wake a complete blindness in relation to what the body is as a living possibility of running, of dancing, etc.  And, of course, the discovery of my body as an object really is a revelation of its body.  But the being that is in this way revealed to me is its being-for-the-Other .  That this confusion leads to absurdities can be clearly seen in relation to the famous problem of “inverted vision.” We know the question raised by physiologists: “How are we able to turn the objects that are painted on our retinas upside down the right way up?” And we also know the philosophers’ reply: “There is no problem.  An object is the right way up, or upside down, in relation to the rest of the universe.  To perceive the whole universe upside down has no meaning, because it would have to be upside down in relation to something.” But what interests us especially is the origin of this false problem: which is the wish to connect my consciousness of objects to the other’s body.  Here is the candle, the crystal which provides the lens, the inverted image on the retinal screen.  But here, precisely, the retina enters into a physical system: it is a screen , and only that, while the crystal is a lens , and only a lens; both of these are homogeneous in their being with the candle that completes the system.  In order to study the problem of vision, therefore, we have deliberately chosen the physical point of view, which is to say the point of view from outside, of externality; we have considered a dead eye in the midst of the visible world, to give an account of this world’s visibility.  How, after that, can we be astonished that consciousness, which is absolute interiority, refuses to allow itself to be connected with this object? The relations that I establish between an Other’s body and the external object are really existing relations, but they have as their being the being of the for-the-Other; they presuppose an intraworldly center of flowing away of which knowledge is a magical property, of the “action at a distance” type.  Right from the start, these relations are placed within the perspective of the object-other.  If then we wish to reflect on the nature of the body, we have to establish an order in our reflections that conforms to the order of being: we cannot continue to confuse the ontological levels, and we must successively examine the body insofar as it is being-for-itself, and insofar as it is being-for-the-Other; and, in order to avoid absurdities of the “inverted vision” genre, we will fully embrace the idea that each of these two aspects of the body, being at two different and incommunicable levels of being, is irreducible to the other.  It is in its entirety that being-for-itself has to be body, and in its entirety that it has to be consciousness: it cannot be joined to a body.  Similarly, being-for-the-Other is in its entirety body; here there are no “psychological phenomena” to be joined to the body; there is nothing behind the body.  Rather, the body is in its entirety “psychological.” It is these two modes of being of the body that we are going to investigate now.  I.  THE BODY AS BEING-FOR-ITSELF: FACTICITY It seems at first sight that our preceding observations are in conflict with the findings of the Cartesian cogito .  “The soul is easier to know than the body,” said Descartes.  1 And by that he intended to draw a radical distinction between the facts of thought that are accessible to reflection, and the facts about the body, whose knowledge has to be guaranteed by divine goodness.  And, indeed, it seems at first that reflection does only disclose pure facts of consciousness to us.  Of course we will encounter phenomena at this level that appear to include within themselves some connection with the body: “physical” pain, discomfort, pleasure, etc.  But these phenomena are not any the less pure facts of consciousness .  There is a tendency therefore to make them into signs , affections of consciousness on the occasion of the body, without realizing that in so doing we have irremediably chased the body out of consciousness and that no connection will any longer be able to reunite this body, which is already the body-for-the-Other, and the consciousness that, it is claimed, is its manifestation.  We should not therefore set out from that point but from our first relation to the in-itself: from our being-in-the-world.  We know that there is not, on the one hand, a for-itself and, on the other, a world, as two closed wholes, whose means of communication it is necessary afterward to seek.  Rather, the for-itself is by itself a relation to the world; in denying, in relation to itself, that it is being, it makes it the case that there is a world and, in surpassing this negation toward its own possibilities, it discloses the thises as implement-things.  But when we say that the for-itself is in-the-world, and that consciousness is conscious of the world, we must be careful not to understand this as meaning that the world exists facing consciousness as an indefinite multiplicity of reciprocal relations, on which it is able to look down without any perspective and to contemplate without any point of view.  For me , this glass is to the left of the carafe, and slightly behind it; for Pierre , it is to the right, and slightly in front.  We cannot even conceive that a consciousness might look down on the world in such a way that the glass is given to it as being at the same time to the right and to the left of the carafe, in front of it and behind it.  And that is not in consequence of a strict application of the principle of identity but because this fusion of right and left, of front and back, would bring about the complete disappearance of the thises within a primitive indistinction.  Similarly, if the leg of the table is hiding some arabesques on the carpet from my view, that is not because of some finitude or imperfection of my visual organs but because a carpet that was neither hidden by the table, nor under it, nor above it, nor beside it, would no longer have any relation of any kind with it, and would no longer belong to the “world” in which there is the table: the in-itself that shows itself in the guise of the this would return to its indifferent identity; space itself, as a pure relation of externality, would vanish.  The constitution of space as a multiplicity of reciprocal relations can, in fact, only be applied from the abstract point of view of science: it cannot be lived, nor is it possible even to represent it; the triangle that I draw on the board to help me with my abstract reasoning is, insofar as it is on the board, necessarily to the right of the circle, at a tangent to one of its sides.  And I endeavor to surpass the concrete characteristics of the figure drawn in chalk by taking no more account of its orientation in relation to me than of the breadth of the lines or the imperfection of my drawing.  Thus, by virtue solely of the fact that there is a world, this world cannot exist without a univocal orientation in relation to me.  Idealism correctly insisted on the fact that relations make the world.  But, as it situated itself in the domain of Newtonian science, it conceived of these relations as relations of reciprocity.  In this way it was able to achieve only abstract concepts of pure externality, action and reaction, etc., and for just that reason it missed the world, and only managed to explicate the limit-concept of absolute objectivity.  All in all, this concept came down to that of the “ desert world ,” or a “world without men,” which is to say a contradiction, since it is through human-reality that there is a world.  Thus, when it is taken to its conclusion, the concept of objectivity—which aimed to replace the in-itself of dogmatic truth by a pure relation of reciprocal concordance between representations—is itself destroyed.  Scientific progress, moreover, has led to the rejection of this notion of absolute objectivity.  What Broglie, for example, came to describe as an “experiment” is a system of univocal relations from which the observer is not excluded.  2 And if microphysics is obliged to reintegrate the observer at the heart of the scientific system, it is not as a pure subjectivity—that notion would have no more meaning than the notion of pure objectivity—but as an original relation to the world, as a place, as that toward which all the relations under consideration are oriented.  That is why, for example, Heisenberg’s principle of indeterminacy 3 cannot be regarded either as a disconfirmation or as a confirmation of the determinist thesis.  Only, rather than being a pure connection between things, it includes within it man’s original relation to things, and his place within the world.  This shows up clearly, for example, in the fact that we cannot increase the proportional quantities of the dimensions of moving bodies without changing their relations of velocity.  If I examine the movement of one body toward another with the naked eye, and then through the microscope, it will seem to me to be a hundred times faster in the second case because, although the moving body has not come any closer to the body toward which it is moving, it has covered in the same time a space that is a hundred times bigger.  In this way, the notion of velocity no longer means anything unless it is in relation to some given dimensions of moving bodies.  But it is we ourselves who decide on these dimensions through our very arising in the world, and we have to decide on them; otherwise they would not be at all.  In this way they are not relative to the knowledge we gain of them but to our initial commitment at the heart of the world.  This is what the theory of relativity expresses perfectly: there is no experience through which an observer placed within a system can determine whether the system is at rest or moving.  But this relativity is not a “relativism:” it does not concern knowledge ; better still, it implies the dogmatic postulate according to which knowledge delivers us what is .  The relativity of modern science targets being .  Man and the world are relative beings, and relation is the principle of their being.  It follows that the primary relation goes from human-reality to the world: to arise, for me, is to unfold my distances to things and in so doing to make it the case that there are things.  But, in consequence, things are precisely “things-which-exist-at-a-distance-from-me.” In this way the world sends back to me this univocal relation that is my being and through which I make it the case that it is revealed.  The point of view of pure knowledge is contradictory: the only point of view is that of committed knowledge, or, in other words, knowledge and action are only two abstract sides of an original concrete relation.  The real space of the world is the space that Lewin describes as “hodological.” Pure knowledge would in effect be knowledge without any point of view, and therefore a knowledge of the world that was necessarily situated outside the world.  But that has no meaning: the knowing being would only be knowledge, as he would be defined by his object, and his object would disappear within the complete lack of distinction of reciprocal relations.  Thus knowledge can only be something that arises for someone engaged within a determinate point of view that he is .  To be, for human-reality, is to-be-there ; which is to say “there, on that chair,” “there, by the table,” “there, at the summit of this mountain, with these dimensions, this orientation, etc.” That is an ontological necessity.  Still, we need to be quite clear.  In fact, this necessity appears between two contingencies: on the one hand, if it is indeed necessary for me to be in the form of being-there, it is wholly contingent that I should be , because I am not the foundation of my being; on the other hand, if it is necessary for me to be committed within this or that point of view, it is contingent that it should precisely be in this one, to the exclusion of all others.  It is this twofold contingency, encircling a necessity, that we have called the for-itself’s facticity .  We described it in Part Two.  We showed there that the in-itself, nihilated and engulfed in the absolute event of the appearance of the foundation, or the for-itself’s arising, remains at the heart of the for-itself as its original contingency.  Thus the for-itself is maintained by a constant contingency that it takes up on its own account and assimilates, without ever being able to eliminate it.  There is no place where the for-itself can find it within itself, no place where it can seize hold of it and know it, not even through the reflective cogito , because it is always surpassing it toward its own possibilities, and the for-itself only encounters in itself the nothingness that it has to be.  And yet this contingency never ceases to haunt it, and that is what makes me grasp myself at the same time as wholly responsible for my being and wholly unjustifiable.  But the world sends back to me the image of this unjustifiability in the form of the synthetic unity of its univocal relations to me.  It is absolutely necessary that the world appears to me in order .  And, in this sense, this order is me ; it is that image of me that we described in the last chapter of Part Two.  But that it should be this order is completely contingent.  In this way it appears as the necessary and unjustifiable disposition of the totality of beings.  This absolutely necessary and wholly unjustifiable order of things in the world, this order which is myself insofar as my arising makes it necessarily exist, and which escapes me insofar as I am neither the foundation of my being nor the foundation of some particular being, is the body as it is at the level of the for-itself.  In this sense, we can define the body as the contingent form taken by the necessity of my contingency .  It is nothing other than the for-itself; it is not an in-itself in the for-itself because in that case it would freeze everything.  But it is the fact that the for-itself is not its own foundation, insofar as this fact is expressed through the necessity of existing as a contingent being, committed among contingent beings.  As such, the body cannot be distinguished from the for-itself’s situation , since, for the for-itself, to exist and to be situated are one and the same; and, on the other hand, it is identified with the world in its entirety, insofar as the world is the for-itself’s total situation and the measure of its existence.  But a situation is not a pure contingent given: quite on the contrary, it reveals itself only to the extent to which the for-itself surpasses it toward itself.  In consequence, the body-for-itself is never a given that I am able to know: it is there, everywhere, as what is surpassed, and it exists only insofar as I escape it in nihilating myself; it is what I nihilate.  It is the in-itself surpassed by the nihilating for-itself and seizing back the for-itself in this very surpassing.  It is the fact that I am my own motivation without being my own foundation, the fact that I am nothing unless I have to be what I am, and yet—insofar as what I have to be is what I am—I am without having to be.  In a sense, therefore, the body is a necessary characteristic of the for-itself.  It is not true that it is the product of a Demiurge’s arbitrary decision, nor that the union of body and soul is the contingent association of two radically distinct substances; but, on the contrary, it follows necessarily from the for-itself’s nature that it should be a body, i.e., that its nihilating escaping from being comes about in the form of a commitment within the world.  And yet, in another sense, the body manifests my contingency, and is even nothing but this contingency: the Cartesian rationalists were right to be struck by this characteristic; in effect, it represents the individuation of my commitment within the world.  And Plato was not wrong, either, to present the body as what individuates the soul .  Only it would be fruitless to suppose that the soul is the body, insofar as the for-itself is its own individuation.  We will be better able to grasp the significance of these observations if we try to apply them to the problem of sensory knowledge.  The problem of sensory knowledge was posed on the occasion of the appearance in the midst of the world of certain objects that we know as the senses .  First we observed that the Other had eyes and, after that, technicians who were dissecting corpses learned the structure of these objects; they distinguished the cornea from the crystalline lens, and the lens from the retina.  They established that the crystalline object was to be classified within a family of particular objects—lenses—and that the laws of geometric optics concerning lenses could be applied to the object of their study.  More precise dissections, carried out as surgical instruments were being improved, taught us that a group of nerves led out from the retina and terminated in the brain.  Under the microscope, we examined the nerves of corpses and determined their exact route, their point of departure, and their point of arrival.  The set of these items of knowledge concerned, therefore, a certain spatial object called “the eye:” they implied the existence of space and of the world, and they implied, in addition, that we are able to see this eye, or to touch it, which is to say that we ourselves possess a sensory point of view on things.  Finally, all our technical knowledge (the art of making scalpels, lancets) and our scientific knowledge (e.g., the geometric optics that makes it possible to construct and make use of microscopes) is interposed between our knowledge of the eye and the eye itself.  In short, between myself and the eye that I am dissecting, the entire world—such as I make it appear just through my arising—is interposed.  After that, a more thorough investigation allowed us to establish the existence of various nerve endings at the periphery of our body.  We have even succeeded in acting on some of these nerve endings separately, and to perform experiments on living subjects.  We found ourselves then to be in the presence of two worldly objects: on the one hand, the stimulant; on the other, the sensory corpuscle, or the free nerve ending, that we are stimulating.  The stimulant was a physico-chemical object, an electric current, a mechanical or chemical agent, whose properties we knew precisely and whose intensity or duration we were able to vary in a determinate way.  We were dealing therefore with two worldly objects, and their intraworldly relation could be observed through our own senses, or through the medium of instruments.  Once again, the knowledge of this relation presupposed an entire system of scientific and technical knowledge, in short the existence of a world, and our original arising within this world.  In addition, our empirical information allowed us to conceive of a relation between the “interior” of the object-other and the collection of these objective findings.  In effect, we learned that by acting on certain senses we were able “to cause a modification” in the other’s consciousness.  We learned that through language , i.e., through the other’s signifying and objective reactions.  A physical object (the stimulant), a physiological object (the sense), a psychological object (the other), objective manifestations of meaning (language): these are the terms in the objective relation that we wanted to establish.  None of them was able to lead us out of the world of objects.  I have also on occasion acted as a subject in investigations carried out by physiologists or psychologists.  4 If I offered myself to some experiment of this type, I found myself suddenly in a laboratory and perceiving a screen that was more or less brightly lit, or else I experienced small electric shocks, or else I was brushed by an object that I was unable to determine very precisely but whose global presence in the midst of the world, and against me, I was able to grasp.  Not for an instant was I isolated from the world; all these events happened for me in a laboratory, in the center of Paris, in the south building of the Sorbonne; and I remained in the presence of the Other , and the point itself of the experiment required that I should be able to communicate with him through language.  From time to time the experimenter asked me if the screen appeared to me to be more or less brightly lit, if the pressure that was exerted on my hand seemed to be more or less strong, and I answered—which is to say that I gave objective information about things that were appearing in the midst of my world.  Perhaps one inept experimenter asked me if “my sensation of light was more or less strong, more or less intense.” This sentence would have had no meaning for me—since I was in the midst of objects, in the process of observing these objects—had I not been taught long ago to call the objective light, such as it appeared to me in the world at a given instant, a “sensation of light.” I replied therefore that the sensation of light was, for example, less intense, but what I meant by that was that the screen was, in my opinion , less brightly lit.  And this “in my opinion” did not correspond to anything real—because I was apprehending the screen in fact as less brightly lit—other than to an endeavor not to confuse the world’s objectivity for me with a stricter objectivity, the result of experimental measurements and of the agreement of minds with each other.  What I was not in any case able to know was a specific object that the experimenter was observing during this time and which was my visual organ, or certain tactile nerve endings.  The result obtained, therefore, at the end of the experiment could only be to establish a relation between two series of objects : those that were revealed to me during the experiment and those that were revealed during the same time to the experimenter.  The illumination of the screen belonged to my world; my eyes, as objective organs, belonged to the experimenter’s world.  The connection between these two series was claimed therefore to be like a bridge between two worlds; in no case could it be a table of correspondences between the subjective and the objective.  Why, indeed, would we call the collection of luminous, or heavy, or scented objects, as they appeared to me in this laboratory, in Paris, one day in February , etc., “subjectivity?” And if in spite of everything we were to regard this collection as subjective, why should we confer objectivity on the system of objects that were simultaneously revealed to the experimenter, in this same laboratory, on this same day in February? There are not two weights here, or two measures: nowhere will we encounter something that is given as purely sensed , as lived for me without objectification.  Here as always I am conscious of the world and, against the ground of the world, of certain transcendent objects; as always, I surpass what is revealed to me toward the possibility that I have to be—for example, toward the possibility of answering the experimenter correctly and enabling the experiment to succeed.  Of course, these comparisons may provide certain objective results: for example, I can observe that the tepid water seems cold to me when I plunge my hand in it after having plunged it into hot water.  But this observation, which is pompously named “the law of relativity of sensations,” does not concern sensations in any way.  What we have here really is a quality of the object that is revealed to me: the tepid water is cold when I plunge my heated hand into it.  Only, a comparison of this objective quality of water with an equally objective piece of information—the one I am given by the thermometer—reveals a contradiction to me.  This contradiction motivates on my part a free choice of the true objectivity.  The objectivity that I have not chosen is what I will call “subjectivity.” As for the reasons for the “relativity of sensations,” further investigation will reveal them to me in certain objective and synthetic structures that I will call figures (Gestalt).  The Müller-Lyer illusion, the relativity of the senses, etc., are so many names given to objective laws concerning the structures of these figures.  These laws do not inform us about appearances but concern synthetic structures.  I only intervene here to the extent to which my arising within the world engenders the establishing of a relation of each of the objects with each other.  As such, they are revealed as figures .  Scientific objectivity consists in considering the structures separately, in isolating them from the whole: thereafter, they appear with different characteristics.  But there is no case in which we leave an existing world.  We could show in the same way that the so-called threshold of sensation, or the specificity of the senses, comes down to pure determinations of objects as such.  However, the claim has been that this objective relation of the stimulant to the sensory organ is itself surpassed toward a relation between the objective (stimulant–sensory organ) and the subjective (pure sensation), this subjective being defined by the action that the stimulant exerts on us, through the intermediary of the sensory organ.  The sensory organ appears to us to be affected by the stimulant: the protoplasmic and physico-chemical changes which indeed appear in the sensory organ are not produced by this organ itself: they come to it from outside .  At least, that is what we assert, in order to remain faithful to the principle of inertia which constitutes nature in its entirety as externality.  When therefore we establish a correlation between the objective system—the stimulant–sensory organ, which we are currently perceiving, and the subjective system which is for us the set of internal properties of the object-other—we are forced to admit that the new modality that has just appeared within this subjectivity, in connection with the stimulation of the sense, is also, itself, produced by something other than itself.  If in fact it brought itself about spontaneously, that would immediately sever any connection it had with the stimulated organ or, alternatively, the relation that we would be able to establish between them would be any relation whatsoever .  We conceive therefore of an objective unity corresponding to the smallest and the shortest of the perceptible stimulations and we call that “sensation.” We endow this unity with inertia , which is to say that it will be pure externality, since, as it is conceived on the basis of the this , it participates in the externality of the in-itself.  This externality, projected into the heart of the sensation, affects it almost in its very existence: the principle of its being and the occasion of its existence are outside it.  It is therefore external to itself .  At the same time, its raison d’être is not located in some “internal” fact that has the same nature as it but in a real object, the stimulant, and in the change that affects another real object, the sensory organ.  And yet, as it remains inconceivable that a certain being, existing at a certain level of being and incapable of maintaining itself on its own in being, should be determined to exist by an existent that occupies a radically distinct level of being, I conceive of a medium that is homogeneous with it, and itself also constituted in externality, in order to maintain the sensation and to supply it with being.  To this medium I give the name “mind,” or sometimes even “consciousness.” But I conceive of this consciousness as the other’s consciousness, i.e., as an object.  Nonetheless, as the relations that I wish to establish between the sensation and the sensory organ have to be universal, I postulate that the consciousness conceived in this way must also be my consciousness, not for the other but in itself .  In this way I have determined a kind of internal space, within which certain figures called “sensations” are formed, on the occasion of external stimulations.  As this space is pure passivity, I assert that it undergoes its sensations.  But by that I do not mean only that it is the internal medium that serves as their matrix.  Now I am inspired by a biological vision of the world, which I borrow from my objective conception of the sensory organ in question, and I claim that this internal space lives its sensation.  In this way “life” is a magical connection that I establish between a passive medium and a passive mode of this medium.  The mind does not produce its own sensations and, in consequence, they remain external to it; but, on the other hand, it appropriates them by living them.  In effect, the unity of the “lived” and the “living” is no longer a spatial juxtaposition, or a relation between what is contained and its container: it is a magical inherence.  The mind is its own sensations, even while it remains distinct from them.  Therefore the sensation becomes a particular type of object: inert, passive, and simply lived through.  We are thereby obliged to endow it with absolute subjectivity.  But we must be clear about this word “subjectivity.” Here it does not mean belonging to a subject, which is to say to an ipseity which spontaneously motivates itself.  The psychologist’s “subjectivity” is wholly different in kind: it manifests, on the contrary, inertia and the absence of all transcendence.  What is subjective is something unable to get out of itself.  And, precisely, to the extent to which a sensation, as pure externality, can only be an impression in the mind, and to the extent to which it is only itself, only that figure that a flurry has formed in psychological space, it is not transcendence but purely and simply what is undergone, the mere determination of our receptivity: it is subjectivity because it is in no way presentative or representative .  The object-other’s subjectivity is purely and simply a closed casket.  The sensation is in the casket.  Such is the notion of sensation .  We can see its absurdity.  In the first place, it is purely invented.  It corresponds to nothing that I experience in myself or in the Other.  We have only ever grasped the objective universe; all our personal determinations presuppose the world, and arise as relations to the world.  As for sensation, it presupposes that man is already in the world, since he has sensory organs at his disposal, and it appears in him as a pure cessation of his relations with the world.  At the same time, this pure “subjectivity” presents itself as the necessary base on which he will have to reconstruct all those transcendent relations that its apparition has just caused to disappear.  Thus we encounter these three moments of thought: (1) In order to establish the sensation, it is necessary to start out from a certain realism: we regard our perception of the Other, of the Other’s senses and of the instruments of induction as valid.  (2) But, at the level of the sensation, all this realism disappears: the sensation, as a pure modification that is undergone, can provide us with information only about ourselves; it is “lived.” (3) And yet that is what I present as the base for my knowledge of the external world.  This base cannot be the foundation of a real contact with things: it does not enable us to conceive of an intentional structure of the mind.  We are obliged to use the term “objectivity” not for an immediate connection with being but for certain conjunctions of sensations that present more permanence or more regularity or which accord better with the set of our representations.  In particular, that is the way in which we are obliged to define our perception of the Other, the Other’s sensory organs, and the instruments of induction: we are dealing with subjective formations with a particular coherence, and that is all.  There can be no question at this level of explaining my sensation in terms of the sensory organ, such as I perceive it in the Other or myself but, quite to the contrary, it is the sensory organ that I explain as a certain association of my sensations.  We can see the inevitable circle.  I use my perception of the Other’s senses as the foundation for an explanation of some sensations and, in particular, of my sensations; but, conversely, my sensations, conceived in this way, constitute the only reality of my perception of the Other’s senses.  And within this circle the same object—the Other’s sensory organ—has neither the same nature nor the same truth in each of its appearances.  It is in the first place reality and, precisely because it is reality, it founds a doctrine which contradicts it.  In appearance the structure of the classical theory of sensation is exactly that of the Cynic argument of the Liar, in which it is precisely because the Cretan is telling the truth that he finds himself lying.  But, in addition, as we have just seen, a sensation is pure subjectivity.  How can it be claimed that we construct an object out of subjectivity? No synthetic grouping is able to confer an objective quality on what is as a matter of principle lived through.  If there must be perception of objects in the world, then it is necessary for us to be, from the very moment of our arising, in the presence of the world and of objects.  Sensation, a notion that is a hybrid between subjective and objective, conceived on the basis of an object, and afterward applied to a subject, of whose bastard existence we are unable to say whether it is de facto or de jure —such a sensation is a pure psychologist’s fantasy, and must be pointedly rejected from any serious theory about the relations of consciousness and the world.  But if sensation is only a word, what becomes of the senses? It will probably be acknowledged that we never encounter in ourselves this phantom and rigorously subjective impression that is sensation; it will be admitted that I only ever grasp the green of this notebook, or this foliage, and never the sensation of green or even the “quasi-green” that Husserl posits as the hyletic matter that is animated by intention into a green-object; others will declare themselves convinced without difficulty that if we assume that the phenomenological reduction is possible—which remains to be proved—it will confront us with objects that have been placed within parentheses, as the pure correlatives of positional acts, and not with impressional residues.  But the fact remains that the senses remain.  I see the green; I touch this polished and cold marble.  An accident may deprive me of an entire sense: I may lose my sight, or become deaf, etc.  What, then, is a sense that does not give us any sensation? The answer is easy.  Let us note first that the sense is everywhere, and everywhere it eludes us.  This inkwell, on the table, is immediately given to me in the shape of a thing and yet it is given to me through sight .  Its presence, therefore, is a visible presence and I am conscious that it is present to me as visible, which is to say I am conscious (of) seeing it.  But even while sight is knowledge of the inkwell, sight eludes any knowledge: we do not have knowledge of sight.  Even reflection will not give us this knowledge.  My reflective consciousness will indeed give me knowledge of my reflective consciousness of the inkpot, but not knowledge of a sensory activity.  It is in this sense that we should take Auguste Comte’s famous claim: “The eye cannot see itself.” 5 We can allow that another organic structure, a contingent arrangement of our visual apparatus, might allow a third eye to see our two eyes while they were seeing.  Can I not see and touch my hand while it is touching? But in that case I would be taking up the other’s viewpoint on my sense, and I would be seeing object-eyes; I cannot see the seeing eye, and I cannot touch the hand insofar as it is touching.  In this way a sense, insofar as it is-for-me, eludes me: it is not the infinite collection of my sensations, since I only ever encounter objects in the world; on the other hand, if I take up a reflective view of my consciousness, I will encounter my consciousness of this or that thing-in-the-world, and not my visual or tactile sense; finally, if I am able to see or to touch my sensory organs, I have a revelation of pure objects in the world, and not of a disclosing or constructive activity.  And yet the sense is there: there is  il y a  sight, touch, hearing.  But if, on the other hand, I consider the system of seen objects as they appear to me, I observe that they are not presented to me in just any order: they are oriented .  Since, then, a sense cannot be defined either by an act that can be grasped or by a succession of states that are lived through, it remains for us to try to define it through its objects.  If sight is not the sum of visual sensations, could it not be the system of objects that are seen? In this case we must return to this idea of orientation that we pointed to a moment ago, and try to grasp its meaning.  First of all, let us note that it is a constitutive structure of a thing.  An object appears against the ground of the world and manifests itself in a relation of externality with other thises that have appeared.  In this way, its disclosure implies the complementary constitution of an undifferentiated ground, which is the total perceptual field, or world.  The formal structure of this relation between the figure and the ground is therefore necessary; in brief, the existence of a visual or tactile or auditory field is a necessity: silence, for example, is the acoustic field of undifferentiated noises, against which the particular sound that we are considering stands out.  But the material connection of some this in particular to the ground is at the same time chosen and given.  It is chosen insofar as the for-itself’s arising is the explicit and internal negation of a particular this against the ground of the world: I look at the cup or the inkwell.  It is given such that my choice is made on the basis of an original distribution of thises , which manifests the very facticity of my arising.  It is necessary that the book appears to me to the right or the left of the table.  But it is contingent that it should appear precisely to the left and, in fact, I am free to look at the book on the table or the table supporting the book.  Sense is the name that we are giving to this contingency, between the necessity and the freedom of my choice.  It implies that the object always appears to me all at once in its entirety —what I see is the cube , the inkwell , the cup —but that this appearance always takes place within a particular perspective that expresses its relations to the ground of the world, and to the other thises .  What I hear is always the note of the violin .  But it is necessary that I hear it through a door , or through the open window , or in the concert hall: otherwise the object would no longer be in the midst of the world and would no longer manifest itself to an existent-arising-within-the-world.  But, on the other hand, if it is quite true that it is not possible for all the thises to appear at the same time on the ground of the world, and that the appearance of some of them causes some of the others to fuse into the ground, and if it is true that each this can only manifest itself in just one way at a time , even though there are an infinite number of ways in which it can appear, we ought not to suppose these rules of appearance to be subjective and psychological: they are strictly objective, and follow from the nature of things.  If the inkwell is hiding a portion of the table from me, that is not due to the nature of my senses but to the nature of the inkwell and the light.  If the object looks smaller as it moves away, we should not explain that by some illusion on the part of the observer but by the strictly external laws of perspective.  In this way, through these objective laws, a strictly objective center of reference is defined: it is the eye, for example, insofar as it is the point, on a diagram of perspective, toward which all the objective lines come to converge.  Thus the perceptual field refers to a center that is objectively defined by this reference, and situated in the field itself that is oriented around it.  Only we do not see this center as a structure of the perceptual field in question: we are it .  Thus the order of objects in the world constantly sends back to us the image of an object that cannot, as a matter of principle, be an object for us , because it is what we have to be.  Thus the structure of the world implies that we cannot see without being visible .  The intraworldly references can only be to objects in the world, and the seen world is constantly defining a visible object, to which its perspectives and arrangements refer back.  This object appears in the midst of the world at the same time as the world: whatever the grouping of objects, it is always given in addition, since it is defined by these objects’ orientation.  Without this object there would be no orientation, as every orientation would be equivalent: it is the contingent arising of one orientation within the infinite possibility of orienting the world; it is this orientation, raised to the absolute.  But this object only exists for us at this level as an abstract indication: it is what everything points out to me, and what I cannot as a matter of principle take hold of, since it is what I am .  Indeed, what I am necessarily cannot be an object for me insofar as I am it .  The object that is indicated by worldly things, and which they enclose within their circle, is for itself and, as a matter of principle, a non-object.  Rather, the arising of my being, in unfolding distances from the starting-point of a center , determines, through the very act of this unfolding, an object which is itself insofar as it is indicated by the world, and which however cannot be intuited by me as an object because I am it; it is me, in my presence to myself as the being that is its own nothingness.  In this way my being-in-the-world, solely by virtue of its actualizing a world, is indicated to itself as a being-in-the-midst-of-the-world by the world that it actualizes, and it could not be otherwise, because there is no other way to enter into contact with the world other than being of the world .  It would be impossible for me to actualize a world without me in it, and which would be a pure object of contemplation from above.  But, on the contrary, I have to lose myself within the world in order for the world to exist and for me to be able to transcend it.  In this way, to say that I have entered the world, “come to the world,” or that there is a world in which I have a body comes to one and the same thing.  In this sense, my body is everywhere upon the world: it is just as much over there, in the fact that the lamppost conceals the shrub that is growing on the sidewalk, as in the fact that the attic, up there, is above the windows of the sixth floor, or in the fact that the passing car is moving from right to left behind the lorry, or that the woman crossing the road seems smaller than the man who is seated on the terrace outside the café.  My body is coextensive with the world, spread right through things, and at the same time it is concentrated in this single point that all those things are indicating, and that I am without being able to know it.  This should enable us to understand what the senses are.  A sense is not given before sensory objects; is it not in fact capable of appearing to the Other as an object? Nor is it given after them: in that case we would have to suppose a world of incommunicable images, mere copies of reality, without being able to conceive of the mechanism of their appearance.  The senses are contemporaneous with the objects: they are even things in person, such as they are disclosed to us in perspective.  They merely represent an objective rule of this disclosure.  In this way, sight does not produce visual sensations, and nor is it affected by light rays; rather, it is the collection of all visible objects insofar as their objective and reciprocal relations all refer to specific magnitudes that are chosen—and undergone at the same time—as measures, and to a specific center of perspective.  From this point of view, a sense cannot in any way be assimilated to subjectivity.  All the variations that it is possible to record within a perceptual field are in effect objective variations.  In particular, the fact that one can eliminate vision by “closing one’s eyelids” is an external fact that is not connected with the subjectivity of apperception.  The eyelid is in fact an object perceived among other objects, and which conceals the other objects from me by virtue of its objective relation with them: to no longer see the other objects in my room because I have closed my eyes is to see the screen of my eyelid; similarly, if I put my gloves on a tablecloth, to no longer see this design on the cloth is precisely to see my gloves .  Similarly, the accidents that affect a sense always belong to the region of objects: “I see yellow” because I have jaundice or because I am wearing yellow glasses.  In both cases the reason for the phenomenon does not lie in a subjective modification of the sense, or even an organic alteration, but an objective relation between worldly objects: in both cases we are seeing “through” something, and the truth of our vision is objective.  If, finally, in some way or other the visual center of reference is destroyed (the destruction only being able to come from the world’s development, in accordance with its own laws, which is to say that it expresses in a particular way my facticity), the visible objects are not annihilated at the same time.  They continue to exist for me , but they exist without any center of reference as a visible totality , without the appearance of any particular this , i.e., in the absolute reciprocity of their relations.  Thus it is the for-itself’s arising in the world which in one stroke makes the world exist as the totality of things, and the senses as the objective way in which the things’ qualities are presented.  What is fundamental is my relation to the world, and this relation defines at the same time the world and the senses, depending on the point of view that one occupies.  Blindness, color blindness, and myopia represent in the first place the way in which there is a world for me, which is to say that they define my visual sense insofar as this latter is the facticity of my arising.  That is why my sense can be objectively known and defined by me, but emptily , on the basis of the world: all that is needed is that my rationalizing and universalizing thought should prolong into the abstract the indications that things are giving to me about my sense, and that it should reconstitute the sense on the basis of these signals, as the historian reconstitutes a historical character in accordance with the remains that indicate him.  But in this case I have reconstructed the world on the terrain of pure rationality in abstracting myself through thought from the world: I look down on the world without being attached to it, I take up an attitude of absolute objectivity, and the sense becomes one object among objects, a relative center of reference which, itself, presupposes coordinates.  But, precisely by so doing, I establish in thought the world’s absolute relativity, which is to say that I posit the absolute equivalence of every center of reference.  I destroy the world’s mundanity, without even realizing.  In this way the world, by constantly indicating to me the sense that I am, and by inviting me to reconstitute it, encourages me to eliminate the personal equation that I am by restoring to the world the worldly center of reference in relation to which the world is arranged.  But by the same token I escape—through abstract thought—the sense that I am, which is to say that I sever my links with the world, I place myself in a state of merely looking down on it, and the world vanishes within the absolute equivalence of its infinite possible relations.  In effect, a sense is our being-in-the-world insofar as we have it to be, in the form of being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  We can generalize these observations; they may be applied to my body in its entirety, insofar as it is the total center of reference indicated by things.  In particular, our body is not only what has for a long time been known as “the seat of the five senses”; it is also the instrument and the goal of our actions.  It is even impossible to distinguish “sensation” from “action,” even according to the terms of classical psychology: this is what we were showing when we pointed out that reality is presented to us neither as a thing nor as an implement but as an implement-thing.  That is why, for our investigation of the body insofar as it is the center of action, we can take as our guiding thread the reasoning that we have used to disclose the true nature of the senses.  Indeed, the moment that we formulate the problem of action, we are at risk of falling into a confusion with serious consequences.  When I pick up this fountain pen and plunge it into the inkwell, I am acting.  But if I am looking at Pierre, who in the same instant is bringing a chair closer to the table, I also observe that he is acting.  Here, therefore, there is a clear risk that we will commit the error that we denounced in relation to the senses, i.e., that we will interpret my action, as it is-for-me on the basis of the other’s action.  For in fact the only action that I am able to know in the actual time in which it is taking place is Pierre’s action.  I see his movement and I determine his goal at the same time: he is bringing a chair closer to the table in order to be able to sit near this table and to write the letter that he told me he wanted to write.  In this way I am able to grasp all the intermediate positions of the chair, and of the body which is moving it, as instrumental organizations: they are means in order to reach a goal that is pursued.  Here, therefore, the other’s body appears to me as an instrument in the midst of other instruments: not only as a tool for making tools but, in addition, as a tool for handling tools , in brief as a tool-machine.  If therefore I interpret the role of my body in relation to my action in the light of my knowledge of the other’s body, I will come to regard myself as having at my disposal a certain instrument of which I can make use as I wish and which, in its turn, arranges the other instruments in accordance with a certain end that I am pursuing.  This brings us back to the classic distinction between the mind and the body: the mind uses the tool that is the body.  The parallelism with the theory of sensation is complete: as we saw, this theory set out from my knowledge of the other’s sense and goes on to endow me with senses that exactly resemble the sensory organs that I perceived on the other.  We also saw the difficulty that such a theory immediately encounters, which is that here I am perceiving the world—and in particular the Other’s sensory organ—through my own sense, a distorting organ, a refractive environment, which can inform me only about its own affections.  In this way the theory’s consequences ruin the objectivity of the very principle that was used to establish it.  The theory of action, which has an analogous structure, encounters analogous difficulties.  If in fact I set out from the Other’s body, I grasp it as an instrument, and insofar as I can make use of it myself as an instrument: I am able in effect to utilize it in order to reach ends that I would be unable to reach on my own; I command its acts, through orders or through prayers; I am also able to bring them about through my own acts, while at the same time I am obliged to take precautions in relation to a tool that is particularly dangerous and delicate to handle.  I have in relation to it the complex attitude of a worker in relation to his tool-machine when he directs its movements and, simultaneously, avoids being hit by it.  And, once again, in order to make use of the Other’s body to maximally serve my interests, I need an instrument that is my own body, just as, in order to perceive the Other’s sensory organs, I need other sensory organs, which are my own ones.  If therefore I conceive of my body in the image of the Other’s body, it is an instrument in the world that I am obliged to handle delicately and which is like the key to the handling of other tools.  But my relations themselves to this special instrument can only be technical ones, and, in order to handle this instrument, I need an instrument, which places us in an infinite regress.  In this way, therefore, if I conceive of my sensory organs as those of the other, they require a sensory organ in order to perceive them—and if I grasp my body as an instrument that resembles the other’s body, it calls for an instrument in order to handle it—and, if we refuse to conceive of this infinite regress, then we will be forced to accept that paradox of a physical instrument being handled by a mind, which, as we know, pushes us into inextricable aporia.  Let us see if instead we can try, in this case as in the other, to restore to the body its nature-for-us.  Objects are disclosed to us within a structure of equipment in which they occupy a determinate place .  This place is not defined by pure spatial coordinates but in relation to axes whose reference is practical.  “The glass is on the tray :” that means we must take care not to knock the glass over if we move the tray.  The packet of tobacco is on the fireplace: that means you have to cross a distance of three meters if you want to go from the pipe to the tobacco, avoiding certain obstacles, small tables, armchairs, etc., which are arranged between the fireplace and the table.  In this sense, there is no distinction at all between perception and the practical organization of existents into a world .  Each implement refers to other implements: to the ones that are its keys , and to those of which it is the key .  But these references would not be grasped by a purely contemplative consciousness: for such a consciousness, the hammer would not refer to the nails but would be next to them; even the phrase “next to” loses all its meaning if it fails to sketch out a path that goes from the hammer to the nail, and which must be taken.  The space that is originally disclosed to me is hodological space: it is crisscrossed by paths and by routes; it is instrumental and the site of tools.  In this way the world, from the moment that my for-itself arises, is disclosed as indicating actions that are to be done, these acts referring to other acts, and those acts to others, and so on.  However, it should be noted that if, from this point of view, perception and action are indiscernible, action is nonetheless presented as a specific efficacy of the future, surpassing and transcending what is purely and simply perceived.  What is perceived, as what my for-itself is present to, is disclosed to me as co-present; it is an immediate contact, a present adherence, brushing up against me.  But, as such, it offers itself up without my being able to grasp it in the present .  The perceived thing is full of promise, and provocative, and every property that it promises to reveal to me, every tacitly consented act of abandonment, every meaningful reference to other objects, commits the future.  Thus I am in the presence of things that are only promises, beyond an ineffable presence that I am unable to possess, and which is the things’ pure “being-there,” which is to say my own, my facticity, my body.  The cup is there, on the saucer; it is given to me in the present with its base which is there , which everything points to, but which I do not see.  And if I wish to see it—i.e., to make it explicit, to make it “appear-against-the-ground-of-the-cup”—I will have to take hold of the cup by its handle, and turn it over: the base of the cup is at the end of my projects, and to say that the cup’s other structures point to it as an indispensable element of the cup is equivalent to saying that they point it out to me as the action that will best appropriate the cup in its meaning to me.  In this way the world, as the correlative of the possibilities that I am, appears from the moment I arise as the enormous outline of all my possible actions.  Perception naturally surpasses itself toward action; better still, it can be disclosed only in and through projects of action.  The world is disclosed as a “hollow that is always in the future,” because we are always future in relation to ourselves.  However, we must note that this world’s future that is disclosed to us in this way is strictly objective.  The instrument-things point to other instruments or to objective ways of making use of them: the nail is “to be driven in” in such and such a way, the hammer “to be picked up by the handle,” the cup “to be picked up by its handle,” etc.  All these properties of things are immediately disclosed, and Latin gerundives express them perfectly.  Of course they are correlative to the non-thetic projects that we are, but they are revealed only as structures of the world: potentialities, absences, equipmentality.  In this way the world appears to me as objectively articulated; it never refers to a creative subjectivity but to the infinite structures of equipment.  Nevertheless, as each instrument refers to another instrument, and this latter to another, all of them end up by pointing to an instrument which is like the key to them all.  This center of reference is necessary; otherwise, as all instrumentalities would become equivalent, the world would vanish through the complete lack of differentiation of its gerundives.  Carthage is “ delenda ” for the Romans, but “ servanda ” for the Carthaginians.  6 Without any relation to these centers, it is nothing; it returns to the indifference of the in-itself, because the two gerundives are annihilated.  However, we need to be clear that the key is never given to me but only “indicated as a hollow.” What I grasp objectively in action is a world of instruments, of which each one is hooked on to the other, and of which each one, insofar as it is grasped in the very action through which I adapt to it and surpass it, refers to another instrument which ought to enable me to use it.  In this sense, the nail refers to the hammer and the hammer refers to the hand and to the arm that use it.  But it is only to the extent that I get the Other to plant nails that the hand and the arm become in their turn instruments that I am using, and that I surpass toward their potentiality.  In this case the Other’s hand refers me to the instrument that will allow me to use this hand (threats, promises, salary, etc.).  The first term is present everywhere but it is only indicated : I do not grasp my hand in the act of writing but only the fountain pen which writes; in other words, I am using the fountain pen to trace the letters, but not my hand to hold the fountain pen.  In relation to my hand, I do not have the same utilizing attitude as in relation to the fountain pen; I am my hand.  In other words, my hand is where the references lead, and where they come to a stop.  In this sense it is the unknowable and unusable term that is indicated by the last instrument in the series: “book to be written—characters to be traced on the paper—fountain pen,” and, at the same time, the orientation of the series in its entirety; the printed book itself refers to it.  But I can only grasp it—at least insofar as it is active—as the constant evanescent reference of the entire series.  In this way, in a duel with swords, or with sticks, it is the stick that I am following with my eyes, and which I handle; in the act of writing, it is the tip of the pen that I am looking at, in a synthetic connection with the line or the grid that is traced on the sheet of paper.  But my hand has vanished; it has become lost in the complex system of equipment, in order for this system to exist.  It is simply its meaning and its orientation.  Thus we seem to find ourselves faced with a twofold contradictory necessity: as it is possible to use—and even to grasp—each instrument only through the medium of another instrument, the universe is an objective, indeterminate reference from tool to tool.  In this sense the world’s structure implies that we can only insert ourselves within the field of equipmentality by being ourselves an implement, that we cannot act without being acted on .  On the other hand, however, a structure of equipment can only be disclosed by determining one cardinal meaning of this structure, and this determination is itself practical and active—to plant a nail, to sow some seeds.  In this case, the structure’s very existence refers immediately to a center.  In this way, this center is at the same time a tool that is objectively defined by the instrumental field that refers to it, and the tool that we are unable to utilize because we would be referred ad infinitum .  We do not employ this instrument; we are it.  It is not given to us in any way other than through the equipmental order of the world, through hodological space, through the univocal or reciprocal relations between machines, but it cannot be given to my action: I do not have to adapt to it, or to adapt some other tool to it; rather, it just is my adaptation to tools, the adaptation that I am.  That is why, if we put to one side the analogical reconstruction of my body on the basis of the Other’s body, there remain two ways of grasping the body.  Either it is known , and objectively defined on the basis of the world, but emptily : for that, it suffices that rationalizing thought should reconstitute the instrument that I am on the basis of the indications given by the implements that I am using—but in that case the fundamental tool becomes a relative center of reference which itself presupposes other tools in order to use it and, by the same token, the world’s instrumentality disappears because, in order to be disclosed, it requires a reference to an absolute center of instrumentality; the world of action becomes the world of classical science that is acted on , while consciousness looks down on a universe of externality and can no longer in any way enter into the world .  Or, instead, the body is concretely given and in full, as just the way in which things are arranged, insofar as the for-itself surpasses it toward a new arrangement; in this case it is present in every action, even though it is invisible—because action reveals the hammer and the nails, the brake and the change of gear, not the foot which puts on the brake or the hand which is hammering—it is lived , and not known .  That is what explains why the well-known “sensation of effort” with which Maine de Biran tried to answer Hume’s challenge is a psychological myth.  7 We never have the sensation of our effort, but nor do we have the peripheral, muscular, skeletal, tendinous, or cutaneous sensations which have been proposed in its stead: we perceive the resistance of things.  What I perceive when I want to carry this glass to my mouth is not my effort but its heaviness , i.e., its resistance to entering into a structure of equipment that I have brought to appear within the world.  Bachelard 8 is right to reproach phenomenology for taking insufficient account of what he calls objects’ “coefficient of adversity.” That is correct, and it applies to Heidegger’s transcendence as much as to Husserl’s intentionality.  But we have fully to understand that equipmentality comes first: it is in relation to an original structure of equipment that things reveal their resistances and their adversity.  The screw is revealed as too big to be screwed into the nut, the support as too fragile to support the weight that I want to support, the stone as too heavy to be raised right up to the ridge of the wall, etc.  Other objects appear as threatening for an equipment-structure that has already been established: the storm and hail for the harvest, the phylloxera for the vine, the fire for the house.  In this way, gradually and through the structures of equipment that are already established, their threat will extend right up to the center of reference that all these implements are indicating and it, in its turn, will indicate the threat through them.  In this sense every means is at the same time favorable and adverse, but within the limits of the fundamental project that is actualized by the for-itself’s arising in the world.  Thus my body is in the first place indicated by the equipment-structures, and secondarily by the vehicles of destruction.  I live my endangered body in relation to threatening machines, just as much as in relation to docile instruments.  It is everywhere: the bomb that destroys my house also opens on to my body, insofar as the house was already an indication of my body.  For my body is always extended through the tool that it utilizes: my body is at the end of the stick on which I am leaning, against the ground; it is at the end of the telescope which shows me the stars; it is on the chair, in the entire house, because it is my adaptation to these tools.  Thus, as we conclude our descriptions, sensation and action have become united, and amount to one and the same thing.  We have abandoned the idea of first endowing ourselves with a body in order to examine afterward the way in which we apprehend or change the world through it.  Rather, on the contrary, we have provided, as the foundation for the disclosure of the body as such, our original relation with the world, i.e., our very arising in the midst of being.  Far from its being the case that our body is for us what is first and discloses things to us, it is implement-things which, in their original appearance, indicate our body to us.  The body is not a screen between things and us: it manifests only the individuality and contingency of our original relation with implement-things.  In this sense we have defined a sense, and a sensory organ in general, as our being-in-the-world insofar as we have that to be in the form of being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  Similarly, we can define action as our being-in-the-world, insofar as we have that to be in the form of being-an-instrument-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  But if I am in the midst of the world, it is because I have made it the case that there is a world by transcending being toward myself; and if I am an instrument of the world, it is because I have made it the case that there are in general instruments through the project of myself toward my possibles.  It is only in a world that there can be a body, and an initial relation is indispensable for this world to exist.  In one sense the body is what I immediately am; in another sense I am separated from it by the world’s infinite breadth; it is given to me by the world’s surge backward, toward my facticity, and the condition of this constant backward surge is a constant surpassing.  We are able now to clarify our body’s nature-for-us .  The preceding remarks have allowed us, in effect, to conclude that the body is what is constantly surpassed .  Indeed, the body, as the sensory center of reference, is that beyond which I am, insofar as I am immediately present to the glass, or the table, or the distant tree I perceive.  In effect, perception can only come about at the very place where the object is perceived, and without distance .  But at the same time it unfolds distances, and that in relation to which the perceived object indicates its distance, as an absolute property of its being, is the body.  Similarly, as the instrumental center of the structures of equipment, the body can only be what is surpassed : it is what I surpass toward a new combination of structures and what I will constantly have to surpass, no matter which instrumental combination I will have arrived at, because every combination, as soon as my surpassing freezes it in its being, points to the body as the center of reference of its frozen immobility.  In this way the body, being what is surpassed, is the Past.  It is the immediate presence of “sensible” things to the for-itself, insofar as this presence indicates a center of reference and is already surpassed , either toward the appearance of a new this , or toward a new combination of implement-things.  In every project of the for-itself, in every perception, the body is there; it is the immediate Past insofar as it still shows up in the Present that flees from it.  Consequently, it is at the same time a point of view and a point of departure : a point of view and a point of departure that I am and that I surpass at the same time toward what I have to be.  But this constantly surpassed point of view, which is constantly reborn at the heart of the surpassing—this point of departure that I never cease to cross and which is myself, remaining behind me—is the necessity of my contingency.  And it is doubly necessary.  That is because, first, it is the continual seizing back of the for-itself by the in-itself and the ontological fact that the for-itself can only be as the being that is not its own foundation: to have a body is to be the foundation of one’s own nothingness, and not to be the foundation of one’s being; I am my body to the extent to which I am ; I am not it to the extent to which I am not what I am; it is through my nihilation that I escape from it.  But I do not thereby make of it an object, because it is constantly from what I am that I am escaping.  And the body is also necessary as the obstacle that is to be surpassed in order to be within the world, i.e., the obstacle that I am to myself.  In this sense, it is not different from the world’s absolute order, that order that I introduce into being by surpassing it, toward a being-that-is-to-come, toward the being-that-is-beyond-being.  We can clearly grasp the unity of these two necessities: to-be-for-oneself is to surpass the world and, in surpassing it, to make it the case that there is a world.  But to surpass the world is precisely not to look down on it: it is to be committed within it in order to emerge out of it, to make oneself necessarily this surpassing perspective.  In this sense, finitude is the necessary condition of the for-itself’s original project.  The necessary condition for me to be—beyond a world that I bring to being—what I am not, and for me to not be what I am, is that, at the heart of the infinite pursuit that I am, there is constantly an elusive given.  I am unable either to grasp or to know this given that I am without having it to be—apart from in the mode of not-being—because it is everywhere reclaimed and surpassed, used for my projects, taken on.  But on the other hand everything points it out to me; its outline is hollowed out by the entirety of the transcendent, through its very transcendence, without my being ever able to turn back toward what it points out, since I am the being that is pointed out.  In particular, we should not understand the given that is pointed out as a pure center of reference of a static ordering of implement-things; rather, on the contrary, their dynamic ordering—whether or not it depends on my action—refers to it according to rules and, just by so doing, the center of reference is defined in its changing as much as in its identity.  It could not be otherwise, since it is by denying, in relation to myself, that I am being that I bring the world to being, and since it is on the basis of my past—which is to say by projecting myself beyond my own being—that I am able to deny, in relation to myself, that I am this being or that one.  From this point of view, the body—i.e., this elusive given—is a necessary condition of my action: if in fact the ends that I am pursuing could be attained through a purely arbitrary wish, if it were enough to wish for something in order to obtain it, and if the use of implements were not determined by definite rules, I would never be able to distinguish within me a desire from a volition, or a dream from an act, or the possible from the real.  No pro-ject of myself would be possible, since in order to actualize something it would suffice to conceive of it; in consequence, my being-for-itself would be annihilated in the lack of distinction between the present and the future.  A phenomenology of action will show, in effect, that an act presupposes a break in continuity between its mere conception and its actualization, which is to say between a universal and abstract thought—“It is necessary for the car’s carburetor not to be clogged ”—and a technical and concrete thought that is directed on this carburetor as it appears to me with its absolute dimensions and its absolute position.  The condition for this technical thought, which cannot be distinguished from the action it directs, is my finitude, my contingency—in a word, my facticity.  Now, I am de facto precisely insofar as I have a past, and this immediate past refers me back to the first in-itself, from whose nihilation I arose through my birth .  In this way, the body as facticity is the past insofar as it originally refers back to a birth , which is to say to the first nihilation that makes me arise from the in-itself that I am de facto , without having it to be.  My birth, the past, contingency, the necessity of a point of view, the de facto condition of any possible action on the world: such is the body , as it is for me .  It is not therefore in any way a contingent addition to my mind but, on the contrary, a permanent structure of my being and the permanent condition of possibility of my consciousness as a consciousness of the world and as a transcending project toward my future.  From this point of view we have to acknowledge at the same time that it is wholly contingent and absurd that I should be disabled, the son of a civil servant or a worker, irritable and lazy and yet that it is necessary that I should be that , or something else, French or German or English, etc., proletarian or bourgeois, or an aristocrat, etc., disabled or puny or strong, irritable or obliging in character, precisely because I cannot look down on the world without the world disappearing.  My birth , insofar as it conditions the way in which objects are disclosed to me (items that are luxuries or basic necessities are more or less accessible , certain social realities appear to me as forbidden , there are barriers and obstacles within my hodological space), my race , insofar as it is pointed out by the Other’s attitude toward me (they are revealed as contemptuous or admiring, as trusting or distrusting me), my class , insofar as it is revealed through the disclosure of the social community to which I belong and insofar as the places that I frequent refer to it, my nationality , my physiological structure , insofar as instruments imply it by the very manner in which they are revealed as resistant or compliant and through their very coefficient of adversity , my character , my past , insofar as everything that I have lived through is pointed out, by the world itself, as my point of view on the world: all of that, insofar as I surpass it in the synthetic unity of my being-in-the-world, is my body , as the necessary condition of the existence of a world, and as the contingent actualization of that condition.  We can now grasp in its full clarity the definition that we gave earlier of the body in its being-for-us: the body is the contingent form taken by the necessity of my contingency.  We are never able to grasp this contingency as such, insofar as our body is for us , because we are a choice and, for us, to be is to choose ourselves.  Even this disability that I suffer is something that, by the very fact of living it, I have taken up; I surpass it toward my own projects, I make of it the necessary obstacle for my being, and I cannot be disabled without choosing myself as disabled, which is to say choosing the way in which I constitute my disability (as “intolerable,” “humiliating,” “to be concealed,” “to reveal to everyone,” “an object of pride,” “the justification for my failures,” etc.).  But this elusive body is precisely the necessity of there being a choice , i.e., the necessity of my not being everything all at once .  In this sense my finitude is a condition of my freedom, for there is no freedom without choice and, just as the body conditions consciousness as a pure consciousness of the world, it also makes it possible, even in its freedom.  We need still to conceive what the body is for me because, precisely because it is elusive, it does not belong to the world’s objects, which is to say those objects that I know and use; and yet, from another angle, since I cannot be anything without being conscious of what I am, it has to be given in some way to my consciousness.  In one sense, of course, it is what all the implements that I grasp are pointing toward, and I apprehend it without knowing it in just those indications that I perceive in the implements.  But if we were to limit ourselves to this observation we would not be able to distinguish, for example, between the body and the telescope through which an astronomer looks at the planets.  In effect, if we are defining the body as the contingent point of view on the world, we must acknowledge that the notion of a point of view presupposes a twofold relation: a relation to the things on which it is a point of view, and a relation with the observer for whom it is a point of view.  When we are dealing with the body-point-of-view, this second relation is radically different from the first; when it is a point of view within the world (through a lorgnette, from a belvedere, through a magnifying glass) which is an objective instrument, distinct from the body, the relations are not really distinct.  A walker who contemplates a panorama from a belvedere can see the belvedere as well as the panorama: he can see the trees between the belvedere’s columns, the belvedere’s roof hides the sky from him, etc.  However, the “distance” between him and the belvedere is by definition smaller than that between his eyes and the panorama.  And the point of view can come up closer to the body, to the point where it has almost merged into it, as we can see for example in the case of glasses, opera-glasses, monocles, etc., which become, so to speak, a supplementary sensory organ.  In the end (and if we conceive of an absolute point of view), the distance between it and the person for whom it is a point of view disappears.  In other words, it becomes impossible to take a step back in order to “gain perspective” and to constitute a new point of view on one’s point of view.  That is exactly what, as we have seen, characterizes the body.  It is the instrument that I am unable to use by means of another instrument, the point of view on which I can no longer take a point of view.  Indeed, at this hill’s summit—which I describe, precisely, as a “lovely point of view”—I am, in the very instant in which I look at the valley, taking up a point of view, and this point of view on the point of view is my body.  But I cannot take a point of view on my body without an infinite regress.  From this it follows, however, that my body cannot be transcendent and known for me ; my spontaneous and unreflective consciousness is no longer a consciousness of the body.  Rather, we should say, by using the verb “to exist” transitively, that it exists its body .  Thus the relation between the body-point-of-view and things is an objective relation, and the relation between consciousness and the body is an existential relation.  How should we understand this latter relation? It is evident, in the first place, that consciousness can exist its body only as consciousness.  In this way, my body is a conscious structure of my consciousness.  But, precisely because it is the point of view on which there can be no point of view, there is no consciousness of the body at the level of the unreflective consciousness.  The body, therefore, belongs among the structures of non-thetic consciousness (of) self.  Can we, however, straightforwardly identify it with that non-thetic consciousness? That is not possible either, because the non-thetic consciousness is a consciousness (of) self insofar as it is a free project toward a possibility that is its own, i.e., insofar as it is the foundation of its own nothingness.  Non-positional consciousness is conscious (of) the body as what it surmounts and nihilates in making itself consciousness, which is to say as something that it is without having it to be, and over which it passes in order to be what it has to be.  In brief, consciousness (of) the body is lateral and retrospective; the body is what is neglected , “ passed over in silence ,” and yet it is what consciousness is ; it is even nothing but the body; the rest is nothingness and silence.  We may compare the consciousness of the body to the consciousness of a sign .  The sign, moreover, belongs with the body; it is one of the body’s essential structures.  Now, a consciousness of the sign exists; otherwise we would not be able to understand its meaning.  But a sign is surpassed toward its meaning , neglected in favor of its sense; it is never grasped for itself; the gaze is constantly directed beyond it.  As consciousness of the body is a lateral and retrospective consciousness of what it is without having it to be—i.e., a consciousness of its elusive contingency, of that on the basis of which it makes itself a choice—it is a non-thetic consciousness of the way it is affected .  Consciousness of the body is inseparable from original affectivity.  Still, we need to properly grasp the meaning of this affectivity, and, in order to do that, a distinction is necessary.  Affectivity, such as it is revealed to us by introspection, is in effect already an affectivity that has been constituted ; it is consciousness of the world.  Every hatred is a hatred of somebody; every anger is an apprehension of someone as odious or unjust or at fault; to like somebody is to “find him likable,” etc.  In these different examples, a transcendent “intention” 9 is directed toward the world and apprehends it as such.  Already, therefore, there is a surpassing, an internal negation; we are in the domain of transcendence and of choice.  But Scheler rightly pointed out that we must distinguish this “intention” from pure affective qualities.  If, for example, I have a “headache,” I can discover within me an intentional affectivity directed toward my pain in order to “suffer” it, to accept it with resignation or to reject it, to give it value (as unfair, or deserved, or purifying, or humiliating, etc.), or to flee from it.  Here it is the intention itself that is affection; it is a pure act that is already a project, purely a consciousness of something.  We cannot consider that to be consciousness (of) the body.  But, precisely, this intention cannot be all that affectivity is.  Since it is a surpassing, it presupposes something that is surpassed.  Proof of that, moreover, is the existence of what Baldwin unhappily called “abstract emotions.” 10 In effect, this author established that we are able to affectively bring about in ourselves certain emotions without concretely experiencing them.  If, for example, someone tells me about some painful event that has cast a shadow over Pierre’s life, I will exclaim “How he must have suffered!” I do not know this suffering and yet I do not actually feel it.  Baldwin calls these intermediaries between pure knowledge and true affection “abstract.” But the mechanism for such an abstraction remains quite obscure.  Who abstracts? If, according to M.  Laporte’s definition, to abstract something is to think separately structures that are unable to exist separated, we are obliged either to identify abstract emotions with pure abstract concepts of emotions, or to acknowledge that these abstractions are unable to exist as such, as real modalities of consciousness.  11 In fact, the professed “abstract emotions” are empty intentions, pure projects of emotion.  In other words, we direct ourselves toward pain and shame, and reach out toward them; consciousness transcends itself, but emptily .  The pain is there, objective and transcendent, but it lacks concrete existence.  It would be better to refer to these meanings that lack matter as affective images : they are undeniably important for artistic creation and psychological understanding.  But what matters here, what separates them from real shame, is the absence of anything “lived through.” Pure affective qualities exist, therefore, which are surpassed and transcended by affective projects.  We should not turn these—as Scheler did—into some kind of “ hyle ” that is carried away by the flux of consciousness: what is in question here is simply the way in which consciousness exists its contingency; it is the very texture of consciousness insofar as it surpasses this texture toward its own possibilities; it is the manner in which consciousness exists —spontaneously and in its non-thetic mode—what it constitutes thetically, but implicitly, as its point of view on the world.  It might be pure pain, but it might also be one’s mood, as the non-thetic, affective tone, the purely pleasant or purely unpleasant—in general terms, everything that we include under the term “ coenesthetic .” This “ coenesthetic ” rarely appears without being surpassed toward the world by a for-itself’s transcendent project; as such, it is extremely difficult to study it in isolation.  However, there are certain favorable experiences in which we can grasp it in its purity, in particular the experience of what we call “physical” pain.  We will therefore turn to this experience in order to conceptually establish the structures of consciousness (of the) body.  My eyes are hurting, but this evening I have to finish reading a philosophical work.  I read.  The book is the object of my consciousness and, through the book, the truths it signifies.  The body is in no way grasped for itself, but it is a point of view and a point of departure: one after the other, the words slide before me; I make them slide ; those at the foot of the page that I have not yet seen still belong to a relative ground, or “page-ground,” which is organized against the “book-ground” and against the absolute ground, or the ground of the world; but, from the ground of their indistinctness, the words call to me; they already have the character of a “ friable totality ”; they are given as “to be made to slide beneath my eyes.” In all of that, the body is only given implicitly : the movement of my eyes appears only in the observer’s view.  For myself, all that I grasp thetically is these words, frozen in their arising, one after the other.  Through my own temporalization, however, the succession of words within objective time is given and known.  Their immobile movement is given through a “movement” of my consciousness; and, for me, this “movement” of consciousness—which is purely a metaphor, which refers to a temporal progression—is the movement of my eyes; it is impossible for me to distinguish my eyes’ movement from the synthetic progression of my acts of consciousness without recourse to the Other’s viewpoint.  And yet, in the very moment in which I am reading, my eyes are hurting .  We should note, first, that this pain may itself be indicated by objects in the world, i.e., by the book I am reading: it may be more difficult to drag the words away from the undifferentiated ground that they constitute; they may tremble or flicker; their meaning may be yielded ineptly; the sentence that I have just read may present itself twice, or three times, as “not understood,” as “needing to be reread.” But these signs themselves may be absent—for example, when “I am absorbed” by my reading and “I forget” my pain (which does not at all mean that it has disappeared, since, if I make myself conscious of it in a further reflective act, it will be given as having already been there); and in any case, that is not what matters to us; what we are trying to grasp is the manner in which consciousness exists its pain.  But, before anything else, we might ask, how does the pain present itself as pain in the eyes ? Do we not find there an intentional reference to a transcendent object, to my body, precisely insofar as it exists outside, within the world? It is incontestable that the pain contains information about itself: it is impossible to confuse a pain in the eyes with a pain in one’s finger or stomach.  However, the pain is wholly lacking in intentionality.  We must be clear: if the pain is given as pain “in the eyes,” there is no mysterious “local sign” here, and not any knowledge either.  Only the pain is precisely the eyes , insofar as consciousness “exists them.” And, as such, it distinguishes itself from any other pain through its very existence, not through a criterion or anything added on.  Of course the denomination “pain in the eyes ” presupposes an entire constitutive labor, which remains for us to describe.  But, from the standpoint we occupy now, we do not yet have to consider it, because it has not yet been undertaken: we are not considering the pain from a reflective point of view; it is not being related to a body-for-the-Other.  It is eye-pain or sight-pain, and is not distinguished from the way in which I apprehend the transcendent words.  We have called it “pain in the eyes,” for clarity in our exposition, but it is not named within consciousness, because it is not known .  It simply distinguishes itself, ineffably and through its very being, from other possible pains.  This pain, however, does not exist anywhere among the actual objects of the universe.  It is not to the right or the left of the book, or within my object-body (the one that the Other sees, which I am able to touch partially and to see partially), or in my point-of-view-body insofar as the world implicitly points that out.  Nor ought we to say that the pain is “superimposed” or, like a harmonic, “added on” to the things I can see.  Those are images that have no meaning.  It is not therefore in space.  But nor does it belong to objective time: it temporalizes itself, and it is in and through that temporalization that world-time can appear.  What, then, is this pain? It is simply consciousness’s translucent matter, its being-there , its attachment to the world; in short, it is the contingency that belongs to the act of reading.  It exists beyond any attention or knowledge, since it slides within every act of attention and act of knowledge, since it is that act itself, insofar as it is without being the foundation of its being.  And yet, even at this level of pure being, the pain can only be non-thetically existed by consciousness, as the contingent attachment to the world, if it is surpassed.  The painful consciousness is an internal negation of the world, but at the same time it exists its pain—i.e., itself—as a separation from itself.  It is not possible for us to reach pure pain, as what is simply lived: it belongs to the category of undefinables and indescribables, which are what they are.  Rather, the painful consciousness is a project toward a further consciousness which would be empty of any pain, i.e., a consciousness whose texture, and being-there, would not be painful.  This lateral movement of escape, this self-separation that characterizes a painful consciousness, does not thereby constitute the pain as a psychological object; it is a non-thetic project of the for-itself.  We learn of it only through the world; it is given, for example, in the way in which the book appears to me as “needing to be read at a faster pace,” whose words squeeze up against each other in an infernal, frozen circle, whose universe in its entirety is struck by disquiet .  Moreover—and this is what characterizes bodily existence—we re-encounter the ineffable from which we want to flee within this very act of separation: it will come to constitute the acts of consciousness that surpass it; it is in fact the contingency and being of the flight that aims to flee from it.  Nowhere else can we come so close to this nihilation of the in-itself by the for-itself, and to the in-itself’s seizing back of the for-itself that fuels this very nihilation.  Granted, one might say.  But you have made things too easy for yourself by choosing a case where the pain is precisely a pain in the functioning organ, a pain in the eye while it is looking, in the hand while it is grasping.  For, of course, I can suffer from a wound in my finger while I am reading.  In this case, it will be difficult to maintain that my pain is the very contingency of my “act of reading.” Let us first take note that, however absorbed I may be by my reading, I do not thereby cease to bring the world to being; better still, my reading is an act that implies in its very nature the existence of the world as a necessary ground.  That does not mean at all that I have a lesser consciousness of the world but that I am conscious of it as the ground .  I do not lose sight of the colors or the movements surrounding me, or cease to hear the sounds—it is simply that they become lost within the undifferentiated totality that serves as the ground of my reading.  Correlatively, the world does not cease to point out my body as the total point of view on the worldly totality but it is the world as ground that points it out.  In this way, my body does not cease to be existed as a totality to the extent to which it is the total contingency of my consciousness.  It is at the same time what the totality of the world as ground points to, and the totality that I exist affectively, in connection with the objective apprehension of the world.  But, to the extent to which a particular this detaches itself as a figure against the ground of the world, it points correlatively toward a functional specification of the bodily totality and, by the same token, my consciousness exists a bodily figure, which stands out against the body-totality that it exists.  The book is read and to the extent to which I exist and I surpass the contingency of vision—or, alternatively, of reading—my eyes appear as the figure, against the ground of bodily totality.  Of course, at this level of existence, my eyes are not the sensory organ seen by the Other but only the actual texture of my consciousness of seeing, insofar as this consciousness is a structure of my wider consciousness of the world.  Indeed, to be conscious is always to be conscious of the world, and in this way the world and the body are always present, albeit in different ways, to my consciousness.  But this total consciousness of the world is conscious of the world as the ground for this or that particular this and so, just as consciousness becomes specified in its very act of nihilation, a particular structure of the body is present against the total ground of embodiment.  In the very moment in which I am reading, I do not therefore cease to be a body, seated in such an armchair, three meters away from the window, in given conditions of temperature and atmospheric pressure.  And this pain in my forefinger is not something that I stop existing , just as I exist my body in general.  Only I exist it insofar as it vanishes within the ground of embodiment, as a subordinate structure within the bodily totality.  It is neither absent nor unconscious; it simply forms part of that existence without distance that positional consciousness has for itself.  If, a moment later, I turn the pages of the book, the pain in my forefinger will—without thereby becoming an object of knowledge—change its position to a contingency that is existed as a figure, against a new organization of my body as the total ground of contingency.  Besides, these remarks correspond to this empirical observation: that it is easier to “distract oneself” from a pain in one’s forefinger or lower back while one is reading than from a pain in one’s eyes.  That is because the pain in my eyes is precisely my reading , and in each instant the words I am reading direct me toward it, whereas the pain in my forefinger or lower back, as an apprehension of the world as ground, gets lost itself as a partial structure within the body as the fundamental apprehension of the ground of the world.  But now, suddenly, I stop reading and am absorbed, at present, in grasping my pain.  In other words, I direct a reflective consciousness on to my present consciousness, or vision-consciousness.  In this way, the current texture of my reflected consciousness—and in particular my pain—is apprehended and posited by my reflective consciousness.  Here we must remember what we said about reflection: it is a totalizing grasp without any point of view, a knowing that bursts its own bounds and which tends to objectify itself, to project what is known across a distance, in order to contemplate and to think it.  Reflection’s primary move is therefore to transcend the pure quality of conscious pain toward a pain-object .  Thus, if we stick to what we have called “complicit” reflection, reflection tends to make pain into something psychological .  This psychological object, apprehended through pain, is an ache .  12 This object has all the characteristics of pain, but it is passive and transcendent.  It is a reality that has its own time, which is neither the time of the external universe nor that of consciousness: psychological time.  It can therefore bear various assessments and determinations.  As such, it is distinct from consciousness itself, and appears through it; it remains permanent while consciousness evolves, and this permanence itself is a condition of the ache’s opacity and passivity.  But on the other hand this ache, insofar as it is grasped through consciousness, has all the characteristics of unity, interiority, and spontaneity of consciousness, but degraded.  This degradation endows it with psychological individuality.  This means, in the first place, that it is absolutely cohesive and has no parts.  In addition, it has its own duration, since it is outside consciousness and possesses a past and a future.  But this duration, which is only a projection of the original temporalization, is an interpenetrating multiplicity.  This ache is “penetrating,” or “caressing,” etc.  And these features aim only to render the way this ache is profiled within duration: they are melodic qualities.  A pain that presents itself through stabs followed by pauses is not apprehended through reflection as a pure alternation of painful and non-painful instances of consciousness: for the reflection that structures it, the brief moments of respite form part of the ache, as the silences form part of a melody.  The whole constitutes the rhythm and the pace of the ache.  But at the same time as it is a passive object, the ache, insofar as it is seen through an absolute spontaneity that is consciousness, is a projection of this spontaneity into the in-itself.  As a passive spontaneity it is magical: it is given as perpetuating itself, as mastering entirely its temporal form.  It appears and disappears in a different way from spatio-temporal objects: if I can no longer see the table, it is because I have turned my head; but if I no longer feel my ache, it is because it “has gone.” What occurs here in fact is a phenomenon that is analogous to what the form-psychologists 13 call the “stroboscopic illusion.” In disappointing the projects of the reflective for-itself, the disappearance of the ache is given as a movement of withdrawal, almost as something willed.  There is an animism to the ache: it presents itself like a living being that has its form, its own duration, and its habits.  The ill have a kind of intimacy with it: when it appears, it is not as a new phenomenon; it is, the ill person will say, “my afternoon attack.” In this way, reflection does not link together the moments of a single attack but, throughout an entire day, it links the attacks to each other.  Nonetheless, this recognitional synthesis has a special character: it does not aim to constitute an object that would remain existing even while it was not given to consciousness (in the manner of a hatred that remains “dozing,” or stays “in the unconscious”).  In fact, when the ache goes away it disappears for good; “ nothing remains of it .” But the curious consequence that follows is that, when it reappears, it arises—in its very passivity—through a kind of spontaneous generation.  For example, we can faintly detect it “starting”; now it is “coming back”; “there it is.” In this way, the first pains are not, any more than the others, apprehended in themselves as the simple and naked texture of reflected consciousness: they are the “signs” of the ache, or even the ache itself, which emerges slowly, like a locomotive slowly starting up.  But, on the other hand, it must be recognized that I constitute the ache with my pain.  That does not mean that I grasp the ache as the cause of my pain but, rather, that each particular pain works like a note in a melody: it is at the same time the melody in its entirety and one “beat” 14 within the melody.  Through each pain I can grasp the ache in its entirety, and yet it transcends them all, because it is the synthetic totality of all pains, the theme that is developed by and through them.  But the ache’s material does not resemble that of a melody: first, it is purely lived through; there is no distance between the reflected consciousness and the pain, or between the reflective consciousness and the reflected consciousness.  In consequence, the ache is transcendent but without distance.  As a synthetic totality, it is outside my consciousness and already at the point of being elsewhere but, from another angle, it is inside it; it penetrates within it, through all its serrations, through all of its notes, which are my consciousness .  At this level, what has become of the body ? Let us note that, with the reflective projection, there has been a kind of scission: for unreflected consciousness, the pain was the body; for reflective consciousness, the ache is distinct from the body, has its own shape, and comes and goes.  At the reflective level at which we are positioned—i.e., before the for-the-Other intervenes—the body is not explicitly and thematically given to consciousness.  The reflective consciousness is a consciousness of the ache.  Only, if the ache has a form that is distinctively its own, and a melodic rhythm that confers on it a transcendent individuality, it adheres through its matter to the for-itself, since it is disclosed through my pain and as the unity of all of my pains of the same type.  It is mine , insofar as I give its matter to it.  I grasp it as being sustained and nourished by a specific passive environment, whose passivity is the exact projection into the in-itself of the contingent facticity of my pains, and which is my passivity.  This medium is not grasped for itself, except in the way that a statue’s matter is grasped when I perceive its form, and yet it is there: it is the passivity on which the ache gnaws and which magically gives it new strength, as the earth did to Antaeus.  15 It is my body at a new level of existence, i.e., as the pure noematic correlative of a reflective consciousness.  Let us call this the psychological body .  It is not yet in any way known , because the reflection that seeks to grasp the painful consciousness is not yet cognitive.  It is affectivity, as it originally arises.  It does grasp the ache as an object, but as an affective object.  We turn toward our pain in the first instance to hate it, to patiently endure it, to apprehend it as unbearable, sometimes to love it, or to be glad of it (if it is a sign of liberation or of recovery), to evaluate it in some way.  And, of course, what we are evaluating is the ache or, rather, that is what arises as the necessary correlative of the evaluation.  Therefore the ache is not known, it is suffered and, in the same way, the body is disclosed through the ache, and is equally suffered by consciousness.  For the body as it is given to reflection to be enriched with cognitive structures, a recourse to the other is required; we cannot discuss that now, because we would need first to have illuminated the structures of the body-for-the-other.  However, we can note right now that this psychological body, as the projection—at the level of the in-itself—of consciousness’s internal texture, provides the implicit matter of all psychological phenomena.  Just as the original body was existed by each instance of consciousness as its own contingency, so is the psychological body suffered as the contingency of hate or of love, of actions and qualities, but this contingency has a new character: insofar as consciousness existed it, it was the in-itself’s seizing back of consciousness; insofar as it is suffered in the ache, or the hatred, or the undertaking, it is projected into the in-itself by reflection.  In consequence, it represents the tendency of every psychological object, beyond its magical cohesion, to become fragmented into externality; it represents, beyond the magical relations that join psychological objects to each other, the tendency of each one of them to become isolated within an indifferent insularity: it is like an implicit space, therefore, which subtends the melodic duration of the psyche.  Insofar as the body is the contingent and indifferent matter of all our psychological events, the body determines a psychological space .  This space has neither top nor bottom, right nor left; it is still without parts, insofar as the psyche’s magical cohesion enters in, and fights the fragmentation of indifference.  That does not make it any less a real characteristic of the psyche : it is not that the psyche is joined to a body but, beneath its melodic organization, the body is its substance and its constant condition of possibility.  It is what appears the moment we name the psyche; it is what lies at the basis of the mechanistic and chemical metaphors that we use in order to classify and to explain psychological events; it is what we aim at and inform in the images (imaginative acts of consciousness) that we produce to aim at and presentify absent feelings; it is, finally, what motivates and to some extent justifies psychological theories such as the theory of the unconscious, and problems such as the preservation of memories.  It goes without saying that we have chosen physical pain as an example, and that there are a thousand other ways, which are themselves contingent, of existing our contingency.  In particular, whenever any pain, any pleasure, or any precise displeasure is “existed” by consciousness, the for-itself does not cease to project itself beyond a contingency that is pure and, so to speak, unqualified.  Consciousness does not cease “to have” a body.  Coenesthetic affectivity is, then, the pure non-positional apprehension of a colorless contingency, a pure apprehension of oneself as a de facto existence.  This constant apprehension by my for-itself of a dull and distanceless taste that accompanies me even in my efforts to escape from it, and which is my taste, is what I have described elsewhere under the name of Nausea .  A discreet and insurmountable nausea constantly reveals my body to my consciousness: it may happen that we seek out pleasure or physical pain in order to escape from it, but the moment that the pain and pleasure are existed by consciousness they manifest in their turn its facticity and its contingency, and it is against the ground of nausea that they are disclosed.  Far from our having to understand this term “nausea” as a metaphor drawn from our physiological disgust, it is, on the contrary, on its foundation that all concrete and empirical instances of nausea, leading us to vomit (nausea at the sight of rotten meat, fresh blood, excrement, etc.), are produced.  II.  THE BODY-FOR-THE-OTHER We have just described the being of my body for-me .  At this ontological level my body is as we have described it, and it is only that .  We will seek in vain in it for the traces of a physiological organ or of an anatomical and spatial constitution.  Either it is the center of reference that is emptily aimed at by the world’s implement-objects, or it is the contingency that the for-itself exists ; more accurately, these two modes of being are complementary.  But the body knows the same avatars as the for-itself does: it has other levels of existence.  It also exists for the Other .  It will be within this new ontological perspective that we are obliged to study it now.  Whether we study the way in which my body appears to the Other or the way in which the Other’s body appears to me amounts to the same thing.  Indeed, we have established that the structures of my being-for-the-Other are identical to those of the Other’s being for me.  For reasons of convenience, therefore, it is on the basis of these latter structures that we will establish the nature of the body-for-the-Other (which is to say, the Other’s body).  In the preceding chapter we showed that it is not the body that first manifests the Other to me.  If in fact the fundamental relation between my being and that of the Other could be reduced to the relation of my body to the other’s body, it would be a pure relation of externality.  But unless it is an internal negation, my connection with the Other is inconceivable.  I must apprehend the Other in the first instance as that for which I exist as an object; in a second moment of ante-historical historialization, my seizing back of my ipseity makes the Other appear as an object; the appearing of the Other’s body is not therefore the first encounter but it is, on the contrary, only an episode in my relations with the Other and, more particularly, in what we have called the Other’s objectification; or, alternatively, the Other exists for me first, and I apprehend him in his body afterward ; for me, the Other’s body is a secondary structure.  In the fundamental phenomenon of the objectification of the other, the Other appears to me as a transcended transcendence.  In other words, by virtue solely of my projecting myself toward my possibilities, I surpass and transcend his transcendence; it is out of play, an object-transcendence.  I apprehend this transcendence in the world and (from the outset), as a specific arrangement of the implement-things in my world, insofar as they indicate in addition a secondary center of reference that is in the midst of the world and which is not me.  These indications are not, in contrast to the indications that indicate me, constitutive of the indicating thing; they are lateral properties of the object.  As we saw, the Other cannot be a concept that is constitutive of the world.  Therefore, they all have an original contingence, and the character of an event .  But the center of reference that they indicate really is the other , as a transcendence that is merely contemplated or transcended.  It really is to the Other that I am directed by the secondary arrangement of the objects, as the organizer or the beneficiary of this arrangement—in short, to an instrument who arranges the implements in view of an end that he himself produces.  But, in its turn, I surpass and I utilize this end; it is in the midst of the world and I can make use of it for my own ends.  In this way, the Other is first indicated by things as an instrument.  I too am indicated by things as an instrument, and I am a body precisely insofar as I become indicated by things.  It is therefore the Other as a body who is indicated by things, through their lateral and secondary arrangements.  Indeed, I do not even know any implements that do not refer secondarily to the other’s body.  But, earlier on, I was unable to take up any point of view on my body insofar as it was designated by things.  My body is, in effect, the point of view on which I cannot take up any point of view, the instrument of which I cannot make use by means of any instrument.  When I tried, through universalizing thought, to think it emptily, purely as an instrument in the midst of the world, the immediate result was the collapse of the world as such.  On the contrary, by virtue solely of the fact that I am not the other , his body appears to me from the outset as a point of view on which I can take a point of view, as an instrument that I can utilize with other instruments.  It is indicated by the sweep of implement-things, but in its turn it indicates other objects, and in the end it is integrated within my world, and what it indicates is my body .  In this way, the Other’s body is radically different from my body-for-me: it is the tool that I am not, and of which I make use (or which resists me, which comes to the same thing).  It is presented to me from the outset with a specific objective coefficient of utility and adversity.  The Other’s body, therefore, is the Other himself as a transcendence-instrument.  The same remarks can be applied to the Other’s body as a synthetic system of sensory organs.  We do not discover , in and through the Other’s body, the Other’s possibility of knowing us.  That possibility is fundamentally disclosed in and through my object-being for the Other; in other words, it is the essential structure of our original relation to the Other.  And within this original relation, the flight of my world toward the Other is equally given.  By seizing back my ipseity, I transcend the Other’s transcendence insofar as this transcendence is the permanent possibility of apprehending me as an object.  It hereby becomes a transcendence that is purely given, and surpassed toward my own goals, a transcendence that simply “is-there,” and the knowledge that the Other has of me and of the world becomes a knowledge-object, which means it is a property given to the Other, a property that I in turn can know .  Strictly speaking, this knowledge that I gain of him remains empty, insofar as I can never know the act of knowing : as pure transcendence, that act can only be grasped by itself, in the form of non-thetic consciousness or by means of the reflection that stems from it.  What I can know is only his knowledge as being-there or, alternatively, the being-there of the knowledge .  In this way, the sensory organ’s relativity, which was disclosed to me through universalizing reason but which I was unable—in the case of my own sense—to think without bringing about the collapse of the world, is what I apprehend first when I apprehend the object-Other, and I apprehend it without danger , since, as the Other is part of my universe, its relativity cannot bring about this universe’s collapse.  This sense that belongs to the Other is a sense that is known as knowing .  We can see, at the same time, how to explain the error of the psychologists—who define my sense by means of the Other’s sense and bestow on the sensory organ as it is for me a relativity that belongs to its being-for-the-Other—and how this error can become a truth if, once we have determined the true ordering of being and knowing, we reposition it at its level of being.  In this way, the objects in my world indicate laterally an object-center-of-reference that is the Other.  But this center, in turn, appears to me from a point of view without any point of view that is mine, and which is my body or my contingency.  In short, to use an expression that is inapt but familiar, I know the Other through my senses .  16 Just as the Other is the instrument of which I make use, by means of the instrument that I am, so too is he the system of sensory organs that is revealed to my sensory knowledge ; in other words, he is a facticity appearing to a facticity.  Thus it is possible to carry out, in its true place within the order of knowing and of being, a study of the Other’s sensory organs as they are known sensorily by me.  And this study will take maximal account of the function of these sensory organs, which is to know .  But this knowledge, in turn, will be a pure object for me, which gives rise, for example, to the false problem of “inverted vision.” In point of fact, from the outset, the Other’s sensory organ is in no way an instrument of knowledge for the Other; it is merely the Other’s knowledge, his pure act of knowing, insofar as this knowledge exists in the mode of an object within my universe.  Nonetheless, as yet we have defined the Other’s body only insofar as it is laterally indicated by the implement-things in my universe.  Strictly speaking, that does not provide us with his being-there “in flesh and blood.” Of course, the Other’s body is present everywhere, in just those indications of him that are given by the implement-things, insofar as they reveal themselves as being used by him, and known by him.  This sitting room in which I am waiting for the master of the house reveals to me, in its totality, its owner’s body: this armchair is the armchair-where-he-sits; this desk is the desk-at-which-he-writes; this window is the window through which the light-that-illuminates-the-objects-that-he-sees comes in.  In this way, he is sketched out on all sides, and this sketch is an object-sketch; at any moment, an object may arrive to fulfill it with its matter.  17 But it is still the case that the master of the house “is not there.” He is elsewhere ; he is absent .  But we have seen, precisely, that absence is a structure of being-there .  To be absent is to-be-elsewhere-within-my-world; it is to be already given for me.  The moment I receive a letter from my cousin in Africa, his being-elsewhere is concretely given to me through the letter’s indications themselves, and this being-elsewhere is a being-somewhere: already, it is his body.  There is no other way to explain how the beloved woman’s very letter can sensually stir her lover: the body of the beloved one is present as an absence in these lines and on this paper.  But as being-elsewhere is a being-there in relation to a concrete system of implement-things within a concrete situation , it is already facticity and contingency.  It is not only the encounter that I have had today with Pierre that defines his contingency and mine but his absence yesterday defined in the same way our contingencies and our facticities.  And this facticity of the absent person is given implicitly in the implement-things that indicate him; his sudden appearance adds nothing to it.  Thus the Other’s body is his facticity , as an implement and as the synthesis of sensory organs, insofar as it is revealed to my facticity.  It is given to me the moment the Other exists for me within the world; the Other’s presence or his absence makes no difference.  But now Pierre appears; he comes into my bedroom.  This appearing changes nothing in the fundamental structure of my relation to him: it is contingent, but his absence was contingent.  The objects indicate him to me: when it opens before him, the door he is pushing indicates a human presence, in the same way as the armchair in which he sits down, etc.; but the objects had not ceased to indicate him while he was absent.  And, of course, I exist for him, and he is talking to me; but I existed in the same way yesterday, when he sent me this telegram, which is now on my table, to let me know he was coming.  And yet, there is something new, which is that now he appears against the ground of the world as a this that I am able to look at, to grasp, and to make use of directly.  What does this mean? In the first place, it means that the Other’s facticity—i.e., the contingency of his being—is now explicit , rather than being implicitly contained within the implement-things’ lateral indications.  This facticity is precisely what he exists in and through his for-itself; it is what he constantly lives, through nausea, as a non-positional apprehension of a contingency that he is, as a pure apprehension of himself insofar as he is a de facto existence.  In brief, it is his coenesthesia .  The Other’s appearance discloses the taste of his being as an immediate existence.  Only I do not grasp this taste in the way that he grasps it.  For him, the nausea is not knowledge; it is a non-thetic apprehension of the contingency that he is ; it is a surpassing of this contingency toward the for-itself’s own possibilities; it is a contingency that is existed, a contingency that is undergone and rejected.  It is the very same contingency—and none other—that I am grasping now.  Only I am not this contingency.  I surpass it toward my own possibilities, but this surpassing is a transcending of an other .  This contingency is given to me in its entirety, and without recourse; it is irremediable.  The Other’s for-itself separates itself from this contingency, and constantly surpasses it.  But, insofar as I transcend the Other’s transcendence, I freeze it: it is no longer a remedy against facticity; it emanates from it.  In this way, nothing gets interposed between the Other’s pure contingency as a taste that is for itself and my consciousness.  What I grasp really is this taste, as it is existed.  Only, by the mere fact of my alterity, this taste appears as a this which is known and given in the midst of the world.  The Other’s body is given to me as the pure in-itself of his being—an in-itself among in-itselfs, and that I surpass toward my possibilities.  The Other’s body is revealed therefore by two equally contingent characteristics: it is here, and could be elsewhere—which means the implement-things might be arranged differently in relation to him; he is like this, and could be otherwise—which means I grasp his original contingency in the form of an objective and contingent configuration.  But in reality these two characters are one and the same.  The second only presentifies, only explicates for me, the first.  The Other’s body is the pure fact of the Other’s presence in my world as a being-there that is translated into a being-like-this.  Thus, the Other’s very existence as an Other-for-me implies that he is disclosed as a tool that possesses the property of knowing, and that this property of knowing is attached to some objective existence.  That is what we will call the necessity of the Other’s being contingent for me.  As soon as there is an Other, we are obliged to conclude that he is an instrument furnished with some kind of sensory organs.  But these points only record the abstract necessity of the Other’s having a body.  Insofar as I encounter it, the Other’s body is the disclosure as an object-for-me of the contingent form assumed by the necessity of this contingency.  Any Other must have sensory organs, but not necessarily these sensory organs, not a face , and, finally, not this face .  But all this—the face, the sensory organs, and the presence—is nothing but the contingent form of the necessity that the Other should exist himself as belonging to a race, a class, a background, etc., insofar as this contingent form is surpassed by a transcendence that does not have to exist it .  What, for the Other, is his taste of himself becomes the other’s flesh for me.  Flesh is the pure contingency of presence.  Ordinarily it is masked by clothing, makeup, the haircut or beard, the expression, etc.  But the moment always comes, in the course of prolonged interaction with a person, when all these masks are undone and I find myself in the presence of the pure contingency of his presence; in this case, through a face or other body parts, I have the pure intuition of flesh.  This intuition is not only a knowing; it is an affective apprehension of an absolute contingency, and this apprehension is a particular type of nausea .  The Other’s body is therefore the facticity of a transcended-transcendence insofar as that refers to my facticity.  I can never grasp the Other as a body without grasping my body at the same time, inexplicitly, as the center of reference indicated by the Other.  But, equally, we cannot perceive the Other’s body as flesh in the form of an isolated object, related to other thises by pure relations of externality.  That is true only of a corpse .  The Other’s body as flesh is given to me immediately, as the center of reference of a situation that is synthetically organized around it, and it is inseparable from this situation.  We should not therefore ask how the Other’s body can be first a body for me, and thereafter enter into situation.  Rather, the Other is given to me from the outset as a body in situation .  Therefore, we do not find, for example, that the body comes first and action comes afterward.  Rather, the body is the objective contingency of the Other’s action.  In this way we rediscover, at another level, an ontological necessity that we noted in relation to my body’s existence for me: we said on that occasion that the for-itself’s contingency can be existed only in and through a transcendence; it is the seizing back of the for-itself—which is constantly surpassed, and constantly seizing back anew—by the in-itself, against the ground of an initial nihilation.  Similarly, here, an Other’s body as flesh cannot insert itself into a situation that is antecedently determined.  Rather, it is precisely that on whose basis there is a situation.  Here, too, it can exist only in and through a transcendence.  Only this transcendence is from the start transcended; it is itself an object.  Thus, Pierre’s body is not, first, a hand able, subsequently, to pick up this glass: such a conception would have the effect of placing a corpse at the origin of the living body.  Rather it is the hand-glass complex, insofar as the hand’s flesh underscores the original contingency of this complex.  Far from the body’s relation to objects being a problem, we can never grasp the body outside this relation.  In this way the Other’s body is signifying .  Its meaning is nothing other than a frozen movement of transcendence.  A body is a body insofar as this mass of flesh that it is is defined by the table it looks at, the chair it selects, the sidewalk on which it walks, etc.  But, to develop this further, there can be no question of exhausting the meanings that constitute the body by referring to its concerted actions, its rational use of equipment-structures.  The body is the totality of signifying relations to the world: in this sense it is also defined by reference to the air it breathes, the water it drinks, the meat it eats.  Indeed, the body cannot appear without maintaining signifying relations with the totality of what is.  Like action , life is a transcended-transcendence, and it is meaningful.  18 There is no difference in kind between life, conceived as a totality, and action.  Life represents the set of meanings that we transcend toward objects that are not posited as thises against the ground of the world.  Life is the Other’s body-ground , in opposition to his body-figure , insofar as this body-ground can be apprehended, no longer implicitly and non-positionally by the Other’s for-itself but precisely by me , explicitly and objectively: in that case it appears as a signifying figure against the ground of the universe, but without ceasing to be a ground, and precisely as a ground , for the Other.  But we need to make an important distinction here: the Other’s body, in point of fact, appears “to my body.” In consequence, there is a facticity to my point of view on the Other.  In this respect, we must not confuse my possibility of grasping an organ (an arm, a hand) against the ground of a bodily totality with my explicit apprehension of the Other’s body, or of particular structures of this body insofar as they are lived by the Other as the body-ground .  It is only in the second case that we are apprehending the Other as life .  Indeed, in the first case, it may happen that what we are apprehending as the ground is for him the figure.  When I look at his hand, the rest of his body becomes unified as the ground.  But it might be precisely his forehead or his thorax that exists non-thetically as the figure, against a ground into which his arms and hands have been diluted.  The consequence, of course, is that the being of the Other’s body is a synthetic totality for me.  Therefore: (1) I can never apprehend the Other’s body except on the basis of a total situation which indicates it; (2) I can never perceive any particular organ of the Other’s body in isolation, and each specific organ is always indicated to me on the basis of the totality of flesh or of life .  In this way, my perception of the Other’s body is radically different from my perception of things.  (1) The Other moves between limits which appear in an immediate connection with his movements, and which are the terms within which the meaning of these movements is indicated to me.  These limits are at the same time spatial and temporal.  Spatially, it is the glass placed at a distance from Pierre that is the meaning of his current movement.  Thus, within my perception itself, I go from the “table-glass-bottle, etc.,” collection to the movement of his arm, in order to learn from it what it is.  If the arm is visible and the glass is hidden, I perceive Pierre’s movement purely on the basis of the idea of situation and on the basis of terms at which I aim emptily, beyond the objects that are hiding the glass from me, as the movement’s meaning.  Temporally, I always grasp Pierre’s movement, as it is revealed to me in the present, on the basis of points in the future toward which it extends.  In this way I am acquainted with the body’s present by its future and, more generally still, by the world’s future.  We will never understand anything about the psychological problem of our perception of the Other’s body if we have not first grasped this essential truth, that the Other’s body is perceived quite differently from other bodies: because, in order to perceive it, we always move from what is outside it, in space and time, to it itself; we grasp its movement “back to front,” through a kind of reversal of time and space.  To perceive the Other is to be informed by the world of what he is.  (2) I never perceive an arm that rises alongside a motionless body: I perceive Pierre-who-is-raising-his-arm.  And we should not take that to mean that, through a judgment, I relate the hand’s movement to a “consciousness” that is thought to bring it about; rather, I can only grasp the movement of the hand or arm as a temporal structure of the entire body.  Here it is the whole that determines the order and the movement of the parts.  To be convinced that we really are talking about a primordial perception of the Other’s body here, one needs only to recall the horror that is aroused by the sight of a broken arm that “does not seem to belong to its body” or one of those rapid perceptions in which we see, for example, a hand (whose arm is hidden) climbing like a spider along the wing of a door.  In these various cases, the body disintegrates, and this disintegration is grasped as exceptional.  On the other hand we are familiar with the positive proofs for which the Gestalt theorists have often argued.  It is striking, in fact, that a photograph records a huge magnification of Pierre’s hands when he stretches them in front of him (because it grasps them in their true dimensions, and without any synthetic connection to the bodily totality), whereas we perceive these same hands without any apparent magnification when we observe them with the naked eye.  In this sense, the body appears on the basis of the situation as the synthetic totality of life and of action .  After these various observations it goes without saying there is no difference at all between Pierre’s body and Pierre-for-me.  All that exists for me is the Other’s body, with its different meanings; to-be-an-object-for-the-Other and to-be-a-body are two ontological modalities that are strictly equivalent translations of the for-itself’s being-for-the-Other.  In this way, the meanings do not refer to some mysterious psyche: they are this psyche, insofar as it is a transcended-transcendence.  Doubtless there is a cryptology of the psyche; certain phenomena are “hidden.” But that does not mean at all that the meanings refer to something “beyond the body.” They refer to the world and to themselves.  In particular, those manifestations of emotion or, more generally, those phenomena that are inaccurately called “ expressions ” in no way indicate to us a hidden affection, lived through by some psyche, which might form the immaterial object of the psychologist’s research: these frowns, this blushing, this stammer, this slight trembling of the hands, these sly looks which seem to be at the same time timid and threatening, do not express anger; they are the anger.  But we must understand this clearly: in itself, a clenched fist is nothing, and signifies nothing.  But also, we never perceive a clenched fist : we perceive a man who, in a specific situation, clenches his fist.  This meaningful act, considered in connection with the past and the possibles, and understood on the basis of the synthetic totality “body in situation,” is the anger.  It does not refer to anything apart from actions within the world (of hitting, insulting, etc.), i.e., to new signifying attitudes of the body.  We cannot move outside this: the “psychological object” is delivered in its entirety to perception, and it is inconceivable apart from bodily structures.  If this has not yet been appreciated, or if those—such as the behaviorists—who have maintained it have not themselves well understood what they wanted to say and have caused a scandal around them, that is because we readily believe that all our perceptions are of the same kind.  In fact, perception must immediately deliver up to us the spatio-temporal object.  Its fundamental structure is internal negation, and it delivers the object to me as it is , not as a hollow image of a reality that is out of reach.  But, precisely because of that, to each type of reality there corresponds a new structure of perception.  The body is the ultimate psychological object, the only psychological object .  But if we consider that it is a transcended-transcendence, its perception cannot by its nature be of the same type as the perception of inanimate objects.  And we should not take that to mean that it is progressively enriched but rather that, from the outset, it has another structure.  Hence it is not necessary to resort to habit, or to the argument from analogy, in order to explain how we understand expressive behavior: such behavior is delivered to perception from the outset as comprehensible; its meaning forms part of its being, just as the color of a sheet of paper forms part of the paper.  In order to understand it, therefore, it is no more necessary to refer to further behavior than to refer to the color of the table, of the foliage or of other sheets of paper in order to perceive the color of the page that is placed in front of me.  However, the Other’s body is immediately given to us as what the other is .  In this sense, we grasp it as that which is constantly surpassed toward a goal by each particular meaning.  Take a man walking.  From the beginning I understand his walking on the basis of a spatio-temporal whole (street-road-sidewalk-shops-cars, etc.), of which certain structures represent the forth-coming meaning of his walking.  I perceive this walking by going from the future to the present, even though the future with which I am concerned belongs to universal time, and is a pure “now” which is not yet here.  The walking itself, as a pure becoming, elusive and nihilating, is the present .  But this present is the surpassing toward a future point of something that is walking: beyond the pure and elusive present of the movement of the arm, we try to grasp the substrate of the movement.  This substrate, which—except in the case of a corpse—we never grasp as it is , is nonetheless always there as surpassed, as the past .  19 When I talk about a moving-arm, I regard this arm, which was at rest , as the movement’s substance.  We noted, in Part Two, that this conception cannot be maintained: it cannot be the motionless arm that moves; movement is a sickness in being.  20 Still, it remains true that a psychological movement refers to two terms, the future term of its accomplishment , and the past term: the motionless organ that it alters and surpasses.  And it is precisely as a constant and elusive reference toward a past-being that I perceive the movement-of-the-arm.  I do not see this past-being (the arm, the leg, the body in its entirety at rest); I can only ever glimpse it through the movement that surpasses it, and to which I am present, as a pebble at the bottom of the river may be glimpsed, through the movement of the waters.  Yet this immobility of being that is constantly surpassed and never actualized , to which I constantly refer in order to name that which is moving, is pure facticity, pure flesh, the pure in-itself as the constantly pastified past of the transcended-transcendence.  This pure in-itself that exists only as something surpassed , in and through this surpassing, descends to the level of a corpse if it ceases to be revealed and at the same time concealed by the transcended-transcendence.  As a corpse (i.e., as a life’s pure past , the mere remains ), it still cannot really be understood, other than on the basis of the surpassing that no longer surpasses it: it is what was surpassed toward constantly updated situations .  But on the other hand, insofar as it appears in the present as pure in-itself, it exists in relation to the other thises in the simple relation of indifferent externality: the corpse is no longer in situation .  At the same time it collapses in itself into a multiplicity of beings, each of which maintains relations of pure externality with the others.  Anatomy is the study of the externality that always subtends facticity, insofar as this externality is only ever perceptible on a corpse.  Physiology is the synthetic reconstitution, on the basis of corpses, of the living organism.  It is condemned from the start to understand nothing of life, since it conceives of it merely as a particular modality of death, since it sees the corpse’s infinite divisibility as primary, and is not aware of the synthetic unity of the “surpassing toward,” for which the infinite divisibility is purely and simply the past .  Not even the study of life in a living thing, or vivisection, or the study of the life of protoplasm, or embryology, or the study of an egg: none of these is able to rediscover life.  The observed organ is living, but it is not immersed within the synthetic unity of a life ; it is understood on the basis of anatomy, i.e., on the basis of death.  It would therefore be a huge mistake to believe that the Other’s body that is originally disclosed to us is the body of anatomo-physiology.  The error is as serious as that of confusing our senses “for us” with our sensory organs for the Other.  Rather, the Other’s body is the facticity of transcended-transcendence, insofar as this facticity is constantly a birth , which is to say that it refers to the indifferent externality of a constantly surpassed in-itself.  These considerations allow us to explain what we refer to as “character.” We must note, in fact, that a character has a distinct existence only as an object of knowledge for the Other.  Consciousness does not know its character—unless it determines it reflectively, on the basis of the Other’s point of view; it exists it in a pure lack of distinction, non-thematically and non-thetically, in its experience of its own contingency, and in the nihilation through which it recognizes and surpasses its facticity.  That is why a pure introspective description of oneself does not deliver any character: Proust’s hero “does not have” any character that can be directly grasped; insofar as he is conscious of himself, he is revealed to himself in the first place as a set of general reactions that are common to all men (the “mechanisms” of passion, of the emotions, the order of the appearance of memories, etc.), in which anyone can recognize himself: because these reactions belong to the psyche’s general “nature.” If we succeed (as Abraham tried to do in his book on Proust) 21 in determining the character of the Proustian hero (in relation, for example, to his weakness, his passivity, the singular association in him of love with money), that is because we are interpreting raw givens: we take up an external view on them; we compare them, and try to extract from them permanent and objective relations.  But this requires us to step back: as long as the reader, in accordance with the general perspective of reading, identifies himself with the novel’s hero, the character of “Marcel” will elude him; better still, he does not exist at this level.  Only if I shatter the complicity that unites me to the writer will he appear, if I no longer consider the book as a confidant but as a confidence or, better still, as a document .  Therefore this character exists only at the level of the for-the-Other, which is the reason why the maxims and descriptions of the “ moralistes ”—i.e., the French authors who embarked on an objective and social psychology—never overlap with the subject’s lived experience.  But if a character is essentially for the Other , it cannot be distinguished from the body, as we have described it.  To suppose, for example, that temperament is the cause of character, that a “sanguine temperament” is the cause of irascibility, 22 is to posit character as a psychological entity which presents all the aspects of objectivity and yet is subjective and undergone by the subject.  In fact, the Other’s irascibility is known from the outside, and transcended from the outset by my transcendence.  In this respect, it is no different from a “sanguine temperament,” for example.  In both cases we apprehend the same apoplectic flushing, the same aspects of the body, but we transcend these givens differently, according to our projects: we will be concerned with the temperament if we consider this flushing as a manifestation of the body-ground , which is to say by severing it from its links with the situation; if we tried even to understand it on the basis of a corpse , we would be able to begin a physiological and medical study of it; if, on the contrary, we consider it by coming to it from the global situation, it will be anger itself, or even the promise of anger or, better still, a pledge of anger—i.e., a permanent relation with implement-things, a potentiality.  Therefore the distinction between temperament and character exists only in thought, and character is identical with the body.  That is what justifies the attempts of numerous authors to establish a physiognomy as the basis for characterological research and, in particular, Kretschmer’s excellent studies of the character and structure of the body.  23 The Other’s character is, in effect, immediately given to intuition as a synthetic whole.  That does not mean that we are able then and there to describe it.  It takes time to bring different structures to light, to explicate specific givens that we have immediately grasped affectively, to transform that global indistinction which is the Other’s body into an organized figure.  We can make mistakes, and we may also appeal to general and discursive knowledge (laws that are empirically or statistically established in relation to other subjects) in order to interpret what we see.  But, in any case, what we are doing is nothing more than explicating and organizing—with a view to prediction and to action—the content of our initial intuition.  Doubtless that is what is meant by those people who repeat that “first impressions are never wrong.” From the first encounter, the Other is indeed given in his entirety, and immediately, without any veil or mystery.  To learn, in this case, is to understand, to develop, and to appraise.  Nonetheless, it is in what he is that the Other is in this way given.  Character does not differ from facticity, i.e., from original contingency.  Now, we grasp the Other as free ; we noted earlier that freedom is an objective quality of the Other, as an unconditioned power to change situations.  This power is indistinguishable from the power that originally constitutes the Other, and which makes it the case that a situation exists in general: to be able to change a situation is, in effect, precisely to make it the case that a situation exists.  The Other’s objective freedom is only a transcended-transcendence; as we have established, it is an object-freedom.  In this sense, the Other appears as something that has to be understood on the basis of a situation that is constantly changed.  That explains why the body is always the past .  Hence the Other’s character is revealed to us as what is surpassed .  Even irascibility as a promise of anger is always a promise that has been surpassed.  In this way, character is given as the Other’s facticity, insofar as it is accessible to my intuition, but also insofar as it only is in order to be surpassed.  In this sense, to “get angry” is already, by virtue of the very fact of consenting to it, to surpass one’s irascibility, to give it a meaning: the anger will appear therefore as the object-freedom’s reclamation of its irascibility.  And that does not mean that we are thereby directed toward a subjectivity but merely that what we are transcending here is not just the Other’s facticity but his transcendence, and not just his being—i.e., his past—but his present and his future.  Although the Other’s anger always appears to me as a free-anger (which is evident, by virtue of my judging it), I can always transcend it, i.e., I can inflame it or calm it; better still, it is by transcending it, and only by transcending it, that I can grasp it.  In this way, the body, as the facticity of the transcended-transcendence, is always a body-that-points-beyond-itself: both within space (i.e., the situation) and within time (i.e., the object-freedom).  The body for the Other is the ultimate magical object.  In this way the Other’s body is always “a-body-that-is-more-than-a-body,” because the Other is given to me wholly, and without intermediary, in the constant surpassing of his facticity.  But this surpassing does not direct me to a subjectivity: it is the objective fact that the body—whether as an organism, as a character, or as a tool—never appears to me without surroundings , and must be determined on the basis of these surroundings.  The Other’s body must not be confused with his objectivity.  The Other’s objectivity is his transcendence, as transcended.  The body is the facticity of this transcendence.  But the Other’s corporeality and his objectivity are completely inseparable.  III.  THE THIRD ONTOLOGICAL DIMENSION OF THE BODY I exist my body: that is its first dimension of being.  My body is used and is known by the Other: that is its second dimension.  But, insofar as I am for the Other , the Other is disclosed to me as the subject for whom I am an object.  That is even my fundamental relation with the Other, as we have seen.  I exist therefore for myself as known by the Other—and, in particular, in my very facticity.  I exist for myself as known by the Other in the capacity of a body.  That is the third ontological dimension of my body, which is what we are about to investigate: with that, we will have disposed of the question of the body’s modes of being.  With the appearance of the Other’s look, I have the revelation of my object-being, which is to say of my transcendence as transcended.  An object-Me is revealed to me as the unknowable being, as the flight into the Other that I am, as fully responsible.  But if I can neither know this “me” nor even conceive of it in its reality, at least I am not unable to grasp some of its formal structures.  In particular, I feel that the Other reaches me in my de facto existence; what I am responsible for is my being-there-for-the-Other.  This being-there is precisely the body.  In this way, the encounter with the Other does not only reach me in my transcendence: in and through the transcendence that the Other surpasses, the facticity that my transcendence nihilates and transcends exists for the Other and, to the extent to which I am conscious of existing for the Other, I no longer apprehend my own facticity only in its non-thetic nihilation, no longer only by existing it , but in its flight toward a being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  The impact of the encounter with the Other is an empty revelation for me of my body’s existence, out there, as an in-itself for another.  Thus my body is not given merely as what I simply live : rather, in and through the contingent and absolute fact of the Other’s existence, what I live is itself extended outside me, in a dimension of flight that escapes me.  The depth of being of my body for myself is this constant “outside” to my innermost “inside.” To the extent to which the Other’s omnipresence is the fundamental fact, the objectivity of my being-there is a constant dimension of my facticity: I exist my contingency insofar as I surpass it toward my possibles and insofar as it covertly flees from me, toward the irremediable.  My body is there not only as the point of view that I am but also as a point of view on which points of view are currently being taken, and that I can never take up; on all sides, it escapes me.  That means, first, that this system of senses , which are unable to apprehend themselves, are given as being apprehended elsewhere and by others.  This apprehension, which is therefore manifested emptily, does not have the character of a factual necessity.  As my facticity is pure contingency, and is non-thetically revealed to me as a factual necessity, the being-for-the-Other of that facticity has the effect of multiplying that facticity’s contingency: it gets lost, and flees from me into an infinity of contingency which escapes me.  In this way, in the very moment in which I live my senses, as that intimate point of view on which I am unable to take up any point of view, their being-for-the-Other haunts me: they are .  They are, for the other, in the way in which this table and this tree are for me: they are in the midst of some world ; they are in and through the absolute flowing away of my world toward the Other.  Thus the relativity of my senses, which I am unable to think in the abstract without destroying my world, is at the same time constantly presentified to me by the existence of the other; but this appresentation 24 is pure and elusive.  In the same way, my body is for me the instrument that I am, and which cannot be used by any other instrument; but, to the extent to which the Other, in the original encounter, transcends my being-there toward his possibilities, this instrument that I am is presentified to me as an instrument immersed within an infinite instrumental series, even though I am unable in any way to take up a point of view to survey this series from outside it.  Insofar as it is alienated, my body escapes me toward a being-a-tool-among-tools, toward a being-a-sensory-organ-grasped-through-some-sensory-organs, and does so with an alienating destruction and a concrete collapse of my world, which flows toward the Other and which the Other will seize back within his world.  When, for example, a doctor listens to my chest, I perceive his ear and, to the extent to which the objects of the world indicate me as the absolute center of reference, this perceived ear indicates certain structures as figures that I exist against my body-ground.  These structures are precisely—and within the same arising of my being—something purely lived through; they are what I exist and what I nihilate.  So we find here, in the first instance, the original connection between designation and what is lived: the things I perceive designate what “I exist” subjectively.  But the moment I apprehend, with the collapse of the sensory organ that is the “ear,” the doctor as listening to the sounds of my body, and feeling my body with his body, what was lived through and designated becomes designated as a thing outside my subjectivity , in the midst of a world which is not mine.  My body is designated as alienated.  The experience of my alienation comes about in and through affective structures, such as timidity .  To “feel oneself blushing,” to “feel oneself sweating,” etc.: these are inaccurate phrases, which the timid person uses in order to explain his state: what he means by them is that he has a vivid and constant consciousness of his body, not as it is for him but as it is for the other .  This constant unease, which is the apprehension of my body’s alienation as irremediable, can determine psychoses such as erythrophobia; 25 these are nothing but the metaphysical and horrified apprehension of the existence of my body for the other.  We often say that somebody timid is “embarrassed by his own body.” Strictly speaking, this phrase is incorrect: I cannot be embarrassed by my body such as I exist it.  It is my body as it is for another that ought to embarrass me.  But here again, the phrase is still unhappy, because I can only be embarrassed by some tangible thing that is present within my universe, and which hampers me in my use of other tools.  Here the embarrassment is more subtle, because the thing that hampers me is absent: I never encounter my body for the Other as an obstacle; on the contrary it is because it is never there, because it remains elusive, that it can hamper me.  I try to reach it, to master it, to make use of it as an instrument—because it is also given as an instrument in a world —in order to give it the shape and the attitude it should have, but it is precisely, as a matter of principle, beyond my reach, and all the actions that I undertake to appropriate it escape me in their turn and become frozen at a distance from me as my body-for-the-other.  Thus I am constantly obliged to act “blindly,” to guess where to shoot, without ever knowing the results of my shot.  That is why the timid person, after he has recognized the futility of these attempts, will endeavor to eliminate his body-for-the-other.  When he wishes “not to have a body anymore,” or to be “invisible,” etc., it is not his body-for-himself that he wants to annihilate but this elusive dimension of the alienated-body.  In effect, we attribute as much reality to the body-for-the-other as to the body-for-us.  Better still, the body-for-the-other is the body-for-us, but alienated and elusive.  It seems to us then that the other person performs a function for us of which we are incapable, and yet which it is incumbent on us to perform: seeing us as we are .  Language, by revealing (emptily) to us the major structures of our body-for-the-Other (while our existed body is ineffable), encourages us to unload entirely our alleged task onto the Other.  We resign ourselves to seeing ourselves through the other person’s eyes, which means we try to learn what our being is through the revelations of language.  In this way, a whole system of verbal correspondences appears, through which we come to designate our body as it is for the other, by using those designations to refer to our body as it is for us.  It is at this level that the analogical assimilation of the Other’s body with my body comes about.  Indeed, in order for me to be able to think that “my body is for the Other as the Other’s body is for me,” it is necessary that I should have encountered the Other in his objectifying subjectivity, and then as an object; for me to judge the Other’s body as an object that resembles my body, he must have been given to me as an object, and my body must have disclosed for its part an object-dimension.  An analogy or resemblance can never be what first constitutes the Other’s body-object and my body’s objectivity; but, on the contrary, these two objecthoods must antecedently exist in order for any analogical principle to come into play.  Here, therefore, it is through language that I learn of my body’s structures for the Other.  Nonetheless, we must take care to note that it cannot be at the unreflected level that language and its meanings can slide between my consciousness and the body that it exists.  At that level, the body’s alienation toward the Other and its third dimension of being can only be emptily experienced; they are only an extension of lived facticity.  No concept or cognitive intuition can be attached to them.  The objecthood of my body-for-the-Other is not an object for me, and cannot constitute my body as an object: it is experienced as the flight of the body that I exist.  In order for the items of knowledge that the Other has of my body, and which he communicates to me through language, to be able to give to my body-for-me a structure of some particular type, they have to be applied to an object, and my body has to already be an object for me.  It is therefore at the level of reflective consciousness that they can come into play: it is not facticity, insofar as it is the pure existed of non-thetic consciousness that they come to qualify, but instead the facticity that is apprehended by reflection as a quasi-object.  It is this conceptual layer which, by inserting itself between the quasi-object and reflective consciousness, completes the objectification of the psychological quasi-body.  Reflection, as we have seen, apprehends facticity and surpasses it toward an irreal entity, whose esse is a pure percipi , which we have called the psyche .  This psyche is constituted.  The items of conceptual knowledge that we acquire through our history—all of which arise from our interaction with the Other—come to produce a constitutive layer of the psychological body.  In brief, insofar as we suffer our body reflectively, we constitute it through complicit reflection as a quasi-object—in this way, the observation comes from ourselves.  But as soon as we know it—which is to say we apprehend it in a purely cognitive intuition—we constitute it, through this very intuition, with the Other’s knowledge; i.e., we constitute it as something that it could never be for us by itself.  The knowable structures of our psychological body, therefore, simply and emptily indicate its constant alienation.  Instead of living this alienation, we emptily constitute it by surpassing our lived facticity toward the quasi-object that is the psychological-body, and by further surpassing this suffered quasi-object toward characteristics of being which necessarily cannot be given to me, and which are merely signified.  Let us return, for example, to our description of “physical” pain.  We saw how reflection, by “suffering” it, constituted it into an ache.  But we were obliged to stop our description there, because we lacked the means to go any further.  Now we are able to pursue it: I can aim at the ache which I am suffering in its in-itself, which is to say, precisely, in its being-for-the-Other.  At that moment I know it, which means that I aim at it in the dimension of its being that escapes me, and in the face that it turns toward others, and my aiming becomes suffused with the knowledge that language has brought to me.  In other words, I use instrumental concepts that come to me from the Other, and which I could in no circumstance have formed on my own, or thought by myself of directing on to my body.  It is by means of the Other’s concepts that I know my body.  But from this it follows that, even within my reflection, I am taking up the Other’s point of view on my body; I try to grasp it as if I stood in relation to it as the Other.  It is obvious that in this case the categories that I will apply to my ache constitute it emptily, i.e., in a dimension that escapes me.  Why, then, do we talk about intuition ? It is because, in spite of everything, the suffered body provides the core, the matter, for the alienating meanings that surpass it: it is this ache which escapes from me, toward new characteristics that I establish as its organizing limits and empty schemas.  It is in this way, for example, that my ache—which I suffer as something psychological—will appear to me reflectively as a stomachache .  We should be clear that the pain “in the stomach” is the stomach itself, insofar as it is painfully lived.  As such, before the interposition of the layer of alienating cognition, it is not a local sign, not something identified.  The gastralgia is the stomach, present to consciousness as a pure quality of pain.  As such, we have seen, the ache is distinguished by itself—and without any intellectual operation of identification or discrimination—from any other pain or any other ache.  Only the “stomach,” at this level, is something ineffable, which cannot be named or thought: it is only this suffered figure, detached against the ground of the existed-body.  The objectifying knowledge which now surpasses the suffered ache toward the denominated stomach is knowledge of a specific objective nature of the stomach: I know that it is shaped like a set of bagpipes, that it is a pocket, that it produces juices and diastases, that it is wrapped in a muscular tunic with small fibers, etc.  I may also know—because I have learned this from a doctor—that it is afflicted by an ulcer.  And, further, I can represent this ulcer to myself, more or less clearly.  I may envisage it as a gnawing animal, a mild internal rot; I may conceive it by analogy with abscesses, fever blisters, pus, cankers, etc.  All of this necessarily stems either from knowledge that I have acquired from others, or from knowledge that others have of me.  In any case, it cannot constitute my ache insofar as I possess it but rather insofar as it escapes me.  The stomach and the ulcer become directions of flight, perspectives of alienation of the object I possess.  It is at this point that a new layer of existence appears: we had surpassed the lived pain toward the suffered ache; we surpass the ache toward the illness .  The illness, as something psychological , is of course quite different from the illness that the doctor knows and describes: it is a state.  Here it is not a matter of microbes or lesions of the tissue but of a synthetic form of destruction.  This form necessarily escapes me ; from time to time it shows itself in “flashes” of pain, in my ache’s “crises,” but the rest of the time it remains out of reach, without disappearing.  In that case it is objectively detectable by others : others made it known to me, and others can diagnose it; it is present for others when I am not even conscious of it.  It is therefore in its innermost nature a pure and simple being for the Other .  And when I am not suffering, I talk about it; I behave in relation to it as I would toward an object that is necessarily out of my reach, an object of which others are the custodians.  If I have hepatic colic, I do not drink wine, in order not to arouse the pains in my liver.  But my aim is precise: not arousing the pains in my liver cannot be distinguished in any way from this other aim, obeying the proscriptions of the doctor who revealed them to me.  In this way, another person is responsible for my illness .  And yet this object, which is brought to me through others, retains some characteristics of a degraded spontaneity, by virtue of the fact that I apprehend it through my ache.  Our goal is not to describe this new object, or to emphasize its characteristics of magical spontaneity, destructive finality, harmful potency, or my familiarity with it and its concrete relations with my being (because it is, above all else, my illness).  We merely wish to point out that, in the illness itself, the body is given; just as the body was what supported the ache, it is now the substance of the illness, and what the illness destroys; it is through the body that this destructive form extends.  In this way, the damaged stomach is present through the gastralgia as the very matter out of which this gastralgia is made.  It is there, it is present to intuition, and I apprehend it, with its characteristics, through the suffered pain.  I grasp it as “eaten away at,” as “a pocket in the shape of bagpipes,” etc.  I do not see it, of course, but I know that it is my pain .  That is the source of the phenomena falsely described by the term “endoscopy.” In reality, and contrary to Sollier’s claim, my pain itself does not teach me anything about my stomach.  26 Rather, through and in my pain, my knowledge constitutes a stomach-for-the-Other, which appears to me as a concrete and determinate absence, with just the number of objective characteristics that I have been able to know about it.  But, necessarily, the object that is thus determined is like the pole of alienation of my pain; it is, necessarily, what I am without having it to be, and without being able to transcend it toward anything else.  In this way, just as my being-for-the-Other haunts the facticity that I non-thetically live, so a being-an-object-for-the-Other haunts—like a dimension through which my psychological body escapes—the facticity that is constituted as a quasi-object for complicit reflection.  Likewise, my pure nausea can be surpassed toward a dimension of alienation: in that case it will present me with my body-for-the-Other, in its “demeanor,” its “bearing,” its “physiognomy”; my nausea will then be given in the form of disgust with my face, disgust with my overly white flesh, with my overly rigid expression, etc.  But we need to reverse these terms; it is not that I am disgusted with all of that.  Rather, the nausea is all of that, as non-thetically existed.  And my nausea is extended by my knowledge, toward what it is for the Other.  For the Other is the one who apprehends my nausea as, precisely, flesh , and as having the nauseous character of all flesh.  The preceding observations have not exhausted our description of the appearances of my body.  We still need to describe a type of appearance that we will designate as abnormal .  In effect, I am able to see my hands, to touch my back, to smell the odor of my sweat.  In this case, my hand, for example, appears to me as an object among other objects.  It is no longer indicated as a center of reference by the surroundings; it is organized alongside them within the world and, with them, my hand indicates my body as a center of reference.  It forms part of the world.  Likewise, it is no longer the instrument that I am unable to handle with instruments; on the contrary, it forms part of the implements that I discover in the midst of the world; I can make use of it , for example, by means of my other hand, as when I strike my right hand onto my left fist, in which an almond or a walnut is clasped.  My hand is then integrated within the infinite system of used-implements.  Nothing in this new type of appearance should cause us concern or make us reconsider the preceding points.  Nonetheless, it needed to be mentioned.  It ought to be easily explained, on condition that we return it to its place in the order of the body’s appearances, which is to say on condition that we examine it last, and as an “aberration” in our constitution.  In effect, this appearance of my hand simply means that, in certain well-defined circumstances, we are able to take up the Other’s point of view on our own body or, alternatively, that our own body can appear to us like the Other’s body.  The thinkers who started out from this appearance to produce a general theory of the body radically reversed the terms of the problem, and ran the risk of understanding nothing about the question.  We must take care to note, in effect, that this possibility of seeing our body is a pure, absolutely contingent de facto given.  It cannot be deduced, either from the necessity that the for-itself should “have” a body, or from the de facto structures of the body-for-the-Other.  It is easy to conceive of bodies that are not able to take up any view on themselves; this even seems to be the case for certain insects who, although they have a differentiated nervous system and sensory organs, are not able to make use of this system and these organs to know themselves.  We are dealing therefore with a structural peculiarity that we are obliged to mention, without attempting to deduce it.  To have hands, or to have hands that are able to touch each other: these two facts are at the same level of contingency and, as such, belong either in pure anatomical description or in metaphysics.  We cannot take them as our foundation for a study of embodiment.  In addition, we must note that this appearance of the body does not present us with the body insofar as it acts and perceives but insofar as it is acted and perceived.  In brief, as we pointed out at the start of this chapter, it is possible to conceive of a system of visual organs in which one eye was able to see the other.  But the eye that was seen would be seen as a thing, not as a being of reference.  27 Likewise, the hand that I take hold of is not apprehended as a hand that can take hold but as an object of apprehension.  In this way, the nature of our body for ourselves —to the extent to which we are able to take up the Other’s point of view on it—escapes us entirely.  Moreover, we should note that, even if the arrangement of sensory organs allows us to see the body as it appears to the Other, the body’s appearing in this way as an implement-thing is very delayed in infancy; in any case, it is subsequent to consciousness (of) the body in the strict sense, and of the world as a structure of equipment; and it is subsequent to the perception of the Other’s body.  A child has known for a long time how to take something, to pull it toward him, push it away and hold it, when he learns how to take his own hand, and to see it.  Frequent observations have shown that a child of two months does not see his hand as his hand.  He looks at it and, if he moves it further from his field of vision, he turns his head and looks for it, as if its return to its place in full sight did not depend on him.  It is by means of a series of psychological operations and syntheses of identification and recognition that he will come to be able to establish systems of cross-references between the existed-body and the seen-body.  And, even then, he must already have begun to learn about the Other’s body.  Thus, the perception of my body belongs, chronologically, after the perception of the Other’s body.  If we consider it in its place and at its date, in its original contingency, there is no reason to think it will cause further problems.  The body is the instrument that I am.  It is the facticity of my being-in-the-world, insofar as I surpass it toward my being-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  Of course, it is radically impossible for me to take up a global point of view on this facticity, or I would cease to be it.  But why should we be surprised by the fact that certain structures of my body can, without ceasing to be centers of reference for objects in the world, become ordered from a radically different point of view in relation to other objects, in order to indicate alongside them this or that sensory organ of mine as a partial center of reference, which detaches itself as a figure against the body-ground? It is in the nature of things impossible that my eye should see itself.  But what is surprising about my hand being able to touch my eyes? If someone were to find this surprising, it would be because he had understood the necessity for the for-itself to arise as a concrete point of view on the world as if it were an ideal obligation, one that is strictly reducible to knowable relations between objects and mere rules for the development of my knowledge—instead of seeing it as the necessity of a concrete and contingent existence in the midst of the world.  Chapter 1: The Origin of Negation Chapter 1 GT37 THE ORIGIN OF NEGATION I.  QUESTIONING 1 Our investigation has taken us into the heart of being.  But it has also reached a dead end because we have not been able to establish a connection between the two regions of being we have discovered.  This is probably due to our choosing a perspective ill-suited to our inquiry.  Descartes found himself confronting an analogous problem when he had to describe the relations between the soul and the body.  He suggested then that we should seek a solution in the area where, as a matter of fact, the union of thinking substance with extended substance takes place, i.e., in the imagination.  This is valuable advice.  Of course, Descartes’s concern was not the same as ours, and we do not conceive of the imagination as he did.  But what we can learn is that we should not begin by separating the two terms in a relation, in order to try later to put them back together: a relation is a synthesis.  It follows that the results of its analysis cannot correspond to the moments of this synthesis.  M.  Laporte says that to abstract something is to consider it in an isolated state, when it is not made to exist in isolation.  2 In contrast, something concrete is a totality that can exist by itself, alone.  Husserl takes the same view: redness, for him, is an abstraction, because color cannot exist without shape.  A spatio-temporal and fully determinate “thing” is, on the other hand, concrete.  From this point of view, consciousness is an abstraction, since it contains within it an ontological origin that reaches toward the in-itself and, reciprocally, the phenomenon is also an abstraction, since it has to “appear” to consciousness.  The concrete entity can only be the synthetic totality, of which both consciousness and the phenomenon constitute mere moments.  What is concrete is man in the world, with the specific union of man with the world that Heidegger, for example, names “being-in-the-world.” To interrogate “experience,” like Kant, with respect to its conditions of possibility, or to perform, like Husserl, a phenomenological reduction that reduces the world to the status of the noematic correlative of consciousness, is to begin deliberately from an abstraction.  But we will no more succeed in reconstituting the concrete out of the sum or the organization of the elements abstracted from it than we will succeed, in Spinoza’s system, in reaching the substance through the infinite sum of its modes.  The relation of the regions of being is a primordial bursting forth, which forms part of the very structure of these beings.  That is how we encounter it, from the moment we first inspect it.  We need only open our eyes and interrogate, from a standpoint of naïveté, the totality that is man-in-the-world.  The description of this totality will enable us to answer these two questions: 1.  What is the synthetic relation that we are calling “being-in-the-world?” 2.  What must man and the world be in order for this relation between them to be possible? In truth, each of these questions enters into the other, and we cannot hope to answer them separately.  But each mode of human behavior, as the behavior of man in the world, can simultaneously deliver to us man, the world, and the relation that unites them—so long as we regard these modes of behavior as realities to be objectively apprehended, and not as subjective affections that are able to be disclosed only to the standpoint of reflection.  We will not confine ourselves to studying just one mode of behavior.  On the contrary, we will try to describe several, and to penetrate, within each of them, the basic meaning of the “man-world” relation.  But we ought to begin by choosing some initial mode of behavior to serve as a guiding thread in our investigation.  In fact, our investigation itself provides us with the behavior we are seeking: if I apprehend this man who I am, as he is at this moment in the world, I can see that his attitude toward being is interrogative.  In the very moment in which I ask “Is there a mode of behavior that can reveal man’s relation with the world?” I raise a question.  I can consider this question objectively, since it makes little difference whether the questioner is me or the reader who is reading my words and raising the question alongside me.  On the other hand, the question is not merely the objective set of words traced on this page: it is indifferent to the signs that express it.  In short, it is a human attitude endowed with meaning.  What does this attitude reveal? In every question we confront a being that we interrogate.  Every question presupposes, therefore, a being who questions and a being that is questioned.  The question is not the most basic relation between man and being-in-itself; on the contrary, it stands within the limits of this relation and presupposes it.  Moreover, we are questioning the being that we interrogate with respect to something.  The thing with respect to which I interrogate being participates in being’s transcendence: I interrogate being through its ways of being, or through its being.  From this point of view, a question is a type of expectation: I wait for an answer from the interrogated being.  In other words, against the ground of my pre-interrogative familiarity with being, I expect this being to disclose its being, or its way of being.  The answer will be a Yes or a No.  It is the existence of these two equally objective and contradictory possibilities which distinguishes as a matter of principle, a question from an affirmation or negation.  Some questions appear not to admit of a negative answer—such as, for example, the one we raised earlier: “What does this attitude reveal?” But in fact we can see that it is always possible to answer this type of question with “Nothing” or “Nobody” or “Never.” In this way, in the moment when I ask: “Is there a mode of behavior that can reveal man’s relation with the world to me?” I allow as a matter of principle for the possibility of a negative answer, such as: “No; no such behavior exists.” We accept, therefore, that we may be confronted with the transcendent fact of the nonexistence of such a mode of behavior.  It might be tempting to refuse to believe in the objective existence of a non-being: one could just say that the facts, in this case, direct me to my subjectivity; I learn from transcendent being that the sought-after behavior is a mere fiction.  But, in the first place, to call this behavior a “mere fiction” is to conceal the negation without removing it.  “Being a mere fiction” is equivalent here to “being no more than a fiction.” Next, if you destroy the reality of the negation, you dissolve the reality of the answer.  In fact it is being itself that gives me this answer and which, therefore, discloses the negation to me.  Therefore the permanent and objective possibility of a negative answer does exist for the questioner.  In relation to this possibility the questioner—by the very fact of asking a question—places himself in a state of non-determination: he doesn’t know if the answer will be affirmative or negative.  Thus the question is a bridge thrown between two non-beings: the non-being of knowledge in man, and the possibility of non-being in transcendent being.  And finally, the question implies the existence of a truth.  Through his very question, the questioner affirms that he is waiting for an objective response, in relation to which we can say: “It is like this, and not otherwise.” In short, truth, in its capacity to differentiate being, introduces a third non-being as a determinant of the question: the non-being of limitation.  This threefold non-being conditions all questioning and, in particular, metaphysical questioning—i.e., our questioning.  We set off in search of being, and it seemed to us that our series of questions had led us into the heart of being.  And yet a glance at the activity of questioning itself, just as we were approaching our goal, has suddenly revealed that we are surrounded by nothingness.  Our questions about being are conditioned by the permanent possibility of non-being, outside us and within us.  And non-being, again, circumscribes the answer: what being is necessarily detaches itself against the ground of what it is not .  Whatever the answer, it will be possible to formulate it like this: “Being is that and, apart from that, nothing .” In this way, a new component of reality has just appeared to us: non-being.  This makes our problem more complicated, because we are no longer dealing only with the relations between human being and being in itself but also with being’s relations with non-being, and those of human non-being with transcendent non-being.  But let us take a closer look.  II.  NEGATIONS The objection will be raised that being-in-itself cannot supply negative answers.  Did we not say, ourselves, that it lies equally beyond affirmation and negation? Moreover, ordinary experience, reduced to just what it is, does not seem to disclose any non-being.  I think there are fifteen hundred-francs in my wallet and I find only thirteen hundred francs in it: that does not mean, we might be told, that experience has revealed the non-being of fifteen hundred francs but simply that I counted thirteen one-hundred-franc notes.  The negation, strictly speaking, should be imputed to me: it appears only at the level of my act of judgment, through which I make a comparison between the result I anticipated and the result I obtained.  In this way, negation is only a quality of judgment and what the questioner awaits is a judgment-answer.  As for nothingness, it can be seen to originate in negative judgments, as a concept that establishes the transcendent unity of all such judgments, a propositional function of the type: “X is not.” We can see where this theory is leading: we are made to observe that being-in-itself is full positivity and does not contain within itself any negation.  In addition, those negative judgments, insofar as they are subjective acts, are wholly assimilated to affirmative judgments—without seeing that Kant, for example, distinguished the internal structure of a negative act of judgment from the structure of an affirmative: in both cases a synthesis of concepts takes place, only this synthesis, a full and concrete event within the life of the mind, operates, in one case, by means of the copula “is” and, in the other, by means of the copula “is not.” Similarly, the manual operations of sorting (separation) and assembling (union) are two objective modes of behavior that possess the same de facto reality.  Thus negation is said to be “at the other end of” the act of judgment, yet without thereby being “within” being.  It is like something irreal squeezed between two full realities, neither of which lays claim to it: the being-in-itself that is interrogated with respect to negation refers us—since it is what it is—to our judgment; and the judgment, as something entirely positive and psychological, refers us to being, since the negation it formulates concerns being and is, in consequence, transcendent.  Negation, incapable of existing by itself, the result of concrete psychological operations, and whose existence is maintained by these very operations, has the mode of existence of a noematic correlative, its esse consisting just in its percipi .  And nothingness, as the conceptual unity of negative judgments, cannot have the slightest reality other than that conferred by the Stoics on their “ lekton .” 3 Can we accept this outlook? We can put the question in these terms: Is negation, as the structure of a judicative proposition, the origin of nothingness or, on the contrary, is nothingness, as a structure of reality, the origin and foundation of negation? Thus, the problem of being has directed us to the problem of the question as a human attitude, and the problem of the question directs us to that of negation’s being.  Evidently, non-being always appears within the limits of a human expectation.  It is because I expect to find fifteen hundred francs that I find only thirteen hundred.  It is because the physicist is expecting a particular verification of his hypothesis that nature can say “No” to him.  It would be unproductive, therefore, to deny that negation appears against the basic ground of a relation between man and the world; the world does not reveal its non-beings to anyone who has not in the first place posited them as possibilities.  But does that mean we should reduce these non-beings to pure subjectivity? Does it mean we should accord them the significance and the type of existence that belong to the Stoics’ “ lekton ” or to Husserl’s noema? We do not think so.  In the first place, it is not true that negation is merely a quality of judgment: a question is formulated by means of an interrogative judgment, but it is not a judgment; it is a prejudicative mode of behavior.  I can question something with a look, with a gesture: by questioning being I take up a specific stance in relation to it—and this relation to being is a relation of being; a judgment is only an optional way of expressing it.  Similarly, the questioner does not necessarily have to interrogate a man about being: this conception of the question, by making it an intersubjective phenomenon, peels it away from the being it adheres to, and leaves it hanging in the air purely as a modality of dialogue.  On the contrary, we should conceive of a question within a dialogue as a particular kind within the category of “interrogatives” and understand that what we are questioning is not first and foremost a thinking being.  If my car has broken down, it is the carburetor , the spark plugs , etc., that I interrogate; if my watch stops, I can interrogate the watchmaker about the causes of its stopping, but the watchmaker will, in his turn, put his questions to the various mechanisms of the watch.  What I expect from the carburetor, what the watchmaker expects from the cogs in the watch, is not a judgment: it is a disclosure of being, on the basis of which one can make a judgment.  And if I expect a disclosure of being, it is because I am prepared at the same time for the eventuality of non-being.  If I interrogate the carburetor, it is because I consider it possible that there is nothing in the carburetor.  Thus my question includes, by its nature, a specific prejudicative understanding of non-being; it is, in itself, a relation of being with non-being, against the ground of an original transcendence, i.e., a relation of being with being.  If, moreover, the distinctive nature of questioning is obscured by the fact that questions are frequently asked by one man to other men, we should note that many non-judicative modes of behavior present, in its original undiluted form, this immediate understanding of non-being against the ground of being.  If, for example, we consider destruction , we are obliged to acknowledge that it is an activity that can, of course, make use of judgment as an instrument but that cannot be defined as being solely, or even mainly, judicative.  Yet it presents the same structure as interrogation.  In one sense, of course, man is the only being through whom destruction can be brought about.  A geological fold, or a storm, do not destroy anything—or, at least, they do not destroy directly ; they merely alter the distribution of the mass of beings.  After the storm there is no less than before.  There is something else .  And even this phrase is inappropriate, because in order to posit the disparity we need a witness, who can in some way retain the past and compare it to the present, in the form of a “ no longer .” In the absence of that witness, there is being, both before and after the storm: that is all.  And if a cyclone should bring about the death of some particular living beings, this death can only be destruction if it is lived as such.  For there to be destruction, there must first be a relation of man to being, i.e., transcendence, and, within the limits of this relationship, man must apprehend a being as destructible.  For that, one being must be carved out in its limits within being, and this—as we saw in the case of truth—already involves nihilation.  The being under consideration is that one and, apart from that, nothing .  The artilleryman who is assigned his target takes care to point his cannon in a particular direction, excluding all the others.  But that would still mean nothing if being had not been uncovered as fragile .  And what is fragility, other than a particular probability of non-being, for a given being in some determinate set of circumstances? A being is fragile if it bears within its being a clear-cut possibility of non-being.  But again, it is through man that fragility arrives in being, because the individuating limitation that we mentioned just now is a condition of fragility: a being is fragile, and not all being—which is beyond any possible destruction.  Thus, the relation of individuating limitation that man maintains with a being, against the initial ground of his relation to being, brings fragility to this being as the appearance of a permanent possibility of non-being.  But that is not all: in order for there to be destructibility, man must determine himself, either positively or negatively, as he confronts this possibility of non-being; he must take the necessary measures to bring it about (destruction in the strict sense) or, through a negation of non-being, to go on maintaining it at the level of a mere possibility (protective measures).  Thus, it is man who renders towns destructible, precisely because he posits them as fragile and precious, and because he takes various measures to protect them.  And it is because of this set of measures that an earthquake or a volcanic eruption can destroy these towns or human constructions.  And the primary meaning of war, and its goal, are contained within man’s slightest building.  We must therefore acknowledge that destruction is an essentially human thing and that it is man who destroys his towns through the intermediary of earthquakes, or directly, and it is man who destroys his boats through the intermediary of cyclones, or directly.  But at the same time we must allow that destruction presupposes a prejudicative understanding of nothingness as such, and a mode of behavior in the face of nothingness.  In addition, although destruction arrives in being through man, it is an objective fact and not a thought.  Fragility has impressed itself right into the being of this vase, and its destruction would be an irreversible and absolute event that I could only observe.  There is a transphenomenality of non-being, as of being.  Our examination of the behavior of “destruction” leads us therefore to the same results as our examination of questioning.  But if want to decide for certain, we need only consider a negative judgment in itself, and ask whether it makes non-being appear within being, or whether it confines itself to establishing some prior discovery.  I am meeting Pierre at four o’clock.  I arrive a quarter of an hour late: Pierre is always punctual; will he have waited for me? I look at the room, the customers, and I say, “He is not here.” Is there an intuition of Pierre’s absence or does negation only intervene alongside judgment? At first sight it seems absurd to talk here of “intuition,” just because there cannot be an intuition of nothing , and Pierre’s absence is this nothing.  Yet popular consciousness bears witness to this intuition.  Do we not say, for example, “I saw right away that he was not there?” In this case is the negation simply displaced? Let us take a closer look.  Certainly the café by itself, with its customers, its tables, its seats, its mirrors, its light, its smoke-filled atmosphere, and the sounds that fill it—of voices, saucers bumping against each other, footsteps—is a fullness of being.  And all the particular intuitions I may have are fulfilled by these smells, these sounds, these colors, all of them phenomena that have a transphenomenal being.  Similarly, Pierre’s current presence in a place I do not know is also a plenitude of being.  We seem to have found plenitude everywhere.  But we must observe that in perception a figure is always constituted against a ground.  4 No object, or group of objects, is particularly earmarked to organize itself as either ground or figure: it all depends on the direction of my attention.  When I enter the café to look for Pierre, a synthetic organization of all the objects in the café is formed, against which Pierre is given as having to appear.  And this organization of the café as a ground is a first nihilation.  Each element in the room—person, table, chair—tries to separate itself, to detach itself against the ground constituted by the totality of the other objects, and then collapses back into that undifferentiated ground, and is diluted within it.  Because the ground is something that we only see “in addition”; it is the object of a purely marginal attention.  So this first nihilation of all the figures—which appear and are swallowed up within the total equivalence of a ground —is the necessary condition for the appearance of the principal figure, in this case the person, Pierre.  And this nihilation is given to my intuition; I am the witness of the successive dissolution of every object I look at, especially the faces, which detain me for a moment (“Could that be Pierre?”) and immediately disperse, precisely because they “are not” Pierre’s face.  If, however, I were at last to encounter Pierre, my intuition would be fulfilled by a solid element; all at once I would become fascinated by his face and the whole café, in its inconspicuous presence, would organize itself around him.  But in fact Pierre is not there.  That does not mean that I discover his absence in some precise part of the building.  In fact Pierre is absent from the whole café: his absence freezes the café in its evanescence; the café remains as ground ; it continues to present itself to my merely marginal attention as an undifferentiated totality; it slides away, in pursuit of its nihilation.  Only it makes itself the ground for a specific figure, it bears it everywhere in front of it, it presents me with it everywhere, and this figure, sliding constantly between my gaze and the real, solid objects of the café, is precisely a perpetual dissolution: it is Pierre, detaching himself as a nothingness against the ground of the nihilation of the café.  What is given to intuition, therefore, is a flickering of nothingness: it is the nothingness of the ground, whose nihilation calls for, and requires, the appearance of the figure; and it is also the figure, a nothingness that slides in the guise of nothing across the surface of the ground.  Therefore the foundation for the judgment “Pierre is not here” is clearly my intuitive apprehension of a double nihilation.  And, of course, Pierre’s absence presupposes an initial relation between me and this café; there are an infinite number of people without any relation to this café, for want of any genuine expectation that might register their absence.  But, precisely, I was expecting to see Pierre, and my expectation has made Pierre’s absence happen as a real event concerning this café.  Now his absence is an objective fact that I have discovered , and it presents itself as a synthetic relation between Pierre and the room in which I am looking for him: Pierre, absent, haunts this café and is the condition of its nihilating organization as a ground .  In contrast, the judgments that I might amuse myself by making next—such as “Wellington is not in this café,” “Paul Valéry isn’t here either,” etc.—are purely abstract meanings, mere applications of the principle of negation, without any real basis or efficacy, and do not succeed in establishing any real relationship between the café, Wellington, or Valéry; here the relation “is not” is merely thought .  That suffices to show that non-being does not come to things by means of a negative judgment: on the contrary, it is the negative judgment that is conditioned and supported by non-being.  How, moreover, could it be otherwise? How could we even conceive of the negative form of judgment if everything was a plenitude of being and positivity? We thought, for a moment, that negation might arise from the comparison established between an anticipated result and the result obtained.  But let us look at this comparison; here is the first judgment, a concrete and positive mental act, recording a fact: “There are 1,300 francs in my wallet,” and here is another, and this one also only records a fact and an affirmation: “I was expecting to find 1,500 francs.” Here then are some real and objective facts, positive mental events, affirmative judgments.  Where is there any space for negation? Should we believe that it is nothing but the pure and simple application of a category? And ought we to say that the mind possesses the not within it, as a form of sorting and separation? But in that case we would be removing the slightest suspicion of negativity from negation.  If we allow that the category “not”—a category that exists in fact in the mind, as a positive concrete procedure for handling and systematizing our knowledge—is suddenly activated by the presence of certain affirmative judgments within us, and suddenly stamps with its seal certain thoughts that result from these judgments, we will—by means of these considerations—have scrupulously stripped negation of any negative function.  Because negation is a refusal of existence.  By its means, a being (or a way of being) is posited and then expelled into nothingness.  If negation is a category, if it is only a stamp indifferently placed on various judgments, where do we get the sense that it can nihilate a being, that it can suddenly make something arise, and give it a name in order to expel it into non-being? If our previous judgments (like those we have used as examples) are records of fact, then negation must be like a free invention; it must separate us from this wall of positivity enclosing us.  Negation must be an abrupt break in continuity, an original and irreducible event, that cannot in any circumstances result from any earlier affirmations.  But here we are in the sphere of consciousness.  And consciousness cannot produce a negation, except in the form of consciousness of negation.  No category can “inhabit” consciousness and reside there in the manner of a thing.  The “ not ,” as a sudden intuitive discovery, appears as the consciousness (of being) conscious of the “not.” In brief, if there is being everywhere, it is not only nothingness that—as Bergson would have it—becomes inconceivable: 5 from being we can never derive negation.  The necessary condition for the possibility of saying “ not ” is that non-being should be constantly present, within us and outside us—that nothingness should haunt being.  But where does nothingness come from? And if it is the most basic condition of questioning behavior and, more generally, of all philosophical or scientific investigation, what is the basic relation between human beings and nothingness? What is the most basic nihilating behavior? III.  THE DIALECTICAL CONCEPTION OF NOTHINGNESS It is still too soon for us to claim to be able to extract the meaning of this nothingness, with which the activity of questioning has suddenly confronted us.  But we are able now to provide a number of clarifications.  In particular, it would be no bad thing to determine the relations between being and the non-being that haunts it.  Indeed, we have noticed a degree of parallelism between human ways of behaving in relation to being and man’s behavior in the face of nothingness, and this tempts us immediately to regard being and non-being as two complementary constituents of reality, like shadow and light.  If we do that, we find ourselves dealing with two wholly contemporary notions, able in some way to come together in the production of existents, and which it would be fruitless to consider in isolation.  Pure being and pure non-being would be two abstractions, whose combination alone would form the basis of concrete realities.  That is certainly Hegel’s point of view.  Indeed, he studies the relations of Being and Non-Being in his Logic , and he calls this logic “the system of pure thought-determinations.” 6 And he clarifies his definition: 7 In the case of thought in the ordinary sense, we always represent to ourselves something that is not merely pure thought, for we intend by it something that is thought of, but which has an empirical content.  In the Logic , thoughts are grasped in such a way that they have no content other than the one that belongs to thinking itself, and is brought forth by thinking.  Of course, these determinations are “what is most inward in things,” but at the same time, when we consider them “in and for themselves,” we deduce them from thought itself and we discover in them their truth.  However, Hegel’s logic aims to “make evident the incompleteness of the notions (that it) considers one by one, and the necessity, if we are to understand them, of rising to a more complete notion, which, in integrating them, sublates them.” 8 Le Senne’s remark about Hamelin’s philosophy can be applied to Hegel: “Each of the lower terms depends on the higher term, as the abstract depends on the concrete that is necessary for its actualization.” 9 The truly concrete, for Hegel, is the Existent with its essence; it is the Totality produced by the synthetic integration of all the abstract moments which, in demanding their complement, are sublated within it.  In this sense, Being is an abstraction, the most abstract and impoverished, if we regard it in itself, i.e., by severing it from its sublation toward Essence.  Indeed: Being stands in relation to Essence as the Immediate to the Mediate.  Things simply are, but their Being consists in this: that they manifest their Essence.  Being goes over into Essence; one can express it thus; Being presupposes Essence.  But although Essence, in comparison with Being, appears as that which is mediated, yet, notwithstanding, Essence is the true Origin .  In essence, Being returns into its Ground; Being sublates itself in Essence.  10 In this way, Being, cut off from the Essence that is its foundation, becomes “mere empty immediacy.” And that is just how the Phenomenology of Spirit defines it, which presents pure Being “from the point of view of the truth” as the immediate.  If the beginning of logic must be the immediate, we will be able to find our beginning in Being, as “the first beginning which cannot be anything mediated and further determined.” 11 But Being, thus determined, at once “passes over into” its opposite.  “But this pure being,” Hegel writes in the “lesser” Logic , “is the pure abstraction , and hence it is the absolutely negative , which, when taken immediately, is equally nothing .” 12 Indeed, isn’t nothingness simple self-identity, complete emptiness, the absence of any determinations or content? Therefore, pure being and pure nothingness are the same thing.  Or rather, it is correct to say that they differ.  But “because the distinction has here not yet determined itself, precisely because being and nothing are still the immediate—it is, as belonging to them, what cannot be said , what is merely meant .” 13 In other words, and expressed in concrete terms, “nowhere on heaven or earth is there anything which does not contain both being and nothing in itself.” 14 It is still too soon to discuss Hegel’s conception as it is: when we have all the results of our investigation, we will be able to take up a position in relation to it.  We should simply point out that Hegel reduces being to a meaning of the existent.  Being is surrounded by its essence, which is its foundation and origin.  Hegel’s whole theory is based on the idea that a philosophical process is needed in order to reach—at the beginning of his Logic—the immediate from the mediated, and the abstract from the concrete which founds it.  But we have already pointed out that being, in relation to the phenomenon, is not like the abstract in relation to the concrete.  Being is not one “structure among others,” a moment of the object: it is the very condition of all structures and all moments; it is the foundation on which the characteristics of the phenomenon will be made manifest.  And similarly, we cannot allow that the being of things “consists in manifesting their essence.” 15 If that were the case, there would need to be a being of that being.  If moreover the being of things were “to consist” in their manifesting, it is difficult to see how Hegel could establish a pure moment of Being in which not even a trace of this initial structure can be found.  It is true that pure being is fixed by the understanding, isolated by it and frozen in its actual determinations.  But if its sublation toward essence constitutes being’s main characteristic and if the understanding only “determines and holds the determination fixed,” 16 it is difficult to see why it does not determine being, precisely, as “consisting in manifesting.” It might be said that for Hegel all determination is negation.  But, on this view, the understanding limits itself to denying, in relation to its object, that it is other than it is.  That is probably enough to prevent any dialectical process, but it will not be enough to make sublation disappear, to uproot it entirely.  Insofar as being sublates itself into something else , it escapes the determinations of the understanding, but insofar as it sublates itself —i.e., insofar as it is, in the depths of its being, the origin of its own sublation—it must on the contrary appear as it is to the understanding that freezes it in its own determinations.  To affirm that being is only what it is would at the very least leave being intact insofar as it is its sublation.  That is the ambiguity of Hegel’s notion of “sublation,” which sometimes seems to be a surge from the depths of the being in view and at other times an external movement that carries it away.  It is not enough to claim that the understanding finds in a being only what it is; it still needs to be explained how the being, which is what it is, can be no more than that ; to be legitimate, such an explanation would need to consider the phenomenon of being as such, not the understanding’s processes of negation.  But what we need to examine here is Hegel’s claim that being and nothingness constitute two contraries whose difference, at the level of abstraction under consideration, is merely “meant.” To oppose being to nothingness as thesis to antithesis—as Hegel’s understanding does—is to suppose them to be logically contemporaneous.  In this way, the two contraries arise at the same time, like the two limiting terms of a logical series.  But we must take care here to note that the contraries can enjoy this simultaneity only because they are equally positive (or equally negative).  However, non-being is not the contrary of being but its contradictory.  That implies that nothingness is logically subsequent to being, since being is posited first and then negated.  Being and non-being cannot therefore be concepts with the same content because, on the contrary, non-being requires an irreducible intellectual process: notwithstanding being’s primitive lack of differentiation, non-being is this same lack of differentiation negated .  What enables Hegel to make being “pass over into” nothingness is his implicitly introducing negation into his very definition of being.  This goes without saying, since a definition is negative, and since Hegel has told us—by taking up an expression from Spinoza—that omnis determinatio est negatio .  17 And doesn’t he say: “If any… content were posited in being as distinct, or if it were posited by this determination or content as distinct from an other, it would therefore fail to hold fast to its purity.  It is pure indeterminateness and emptiness.  There is nothing to be intuited in it…?” 18 So he is the one who introduces this negation into being from outside—which he then rediscovers when he makes being pass over into non-being.  But here there is a play on words in relation to the very notion of negation.  Because if I negate, with respect to being, every determination and every content, I can do that only while affirming that at least being is .  Thus, one can negate with respect to being as much as one likes, but one cannot make it not be , by virtue of the very fact that one is negating its being this or that.  Where being is absolute plenitude and entire positivity, negation cannot reach to being’s core.  However, non-being is a negation that aims at that core of plenary density itself.  Non-being negates itself in its heart.  When Hegel writes: 19 “Being and nothing are… empty abstractions, and… each of them is as empty as the other,” he forgets that any void or emptiness must be empty of something.  20 Now, being is empty of any determination other than its identity with itself, but non-being is empty of being .  In brief, and against Hegel, what we need to remember is that being is and that nothingness is not .  Thus, even if being did not support any differentiated quality, nothingness would be logically subsequent to it, since it presupposes being in order to negate it, since the irreducible quality of “not” is superadded to that undifferentiated mass of being in order to deliver it.  That does not only mean that we should refuse to place being and non-being on the same level but, in addition, that we should take care never to posit nothingness as a primordial abyss, out of which being comes.  Our use of the notion of nothingness in its everyday guise always presupposes some preliminary specification of being.  It is striking, in this respect, that language provides us with a nothingness of things (“ Nothing ”) and a nothingness of human beings (“ Nobody ”).  But in the majority of cases the specification is taken still further: we say, referring to a particular collection of objects: “ None of them is to be touched,” which is to say, very precisely, nothing in this collection .  Similarly, someone who is questioned about some quite specific events in private or public life may reply: “I know nothing about it,” and this “nothing” comprises the set of facts about which he was questioned.  21 Even Socrates, with his famous phrase “I know that I know nothing,” 22 refers precisely by this “nothing” to the totality of being, viewed as Truth.  If, adopting for a moment the viewpoint of simple-minded cosmogonies, we tried to ask what “there was” before the world existed and replied “ nothing ,” we would have to recognize that both these terms—“before” and “nothing”—work retrospectively.  What we , lodged within being, are denying today is that there was any being before this being.  The negation here emanates from a consciousness that turns back toward its origins.  If we removed from this original void its property of being empty of this world , and of any structure that had taken on the form of a world, along with its property of before —which presupposes an after in relation to which I constitute it as “before”—the negation itself would vanish, making way for a total absence of determination that would be impossible to conceive—not even, and especially not, in terms of nothingness.  In this way we can say, inverting Spinoza’s formula, that all negation is determination.  Therefore being is antecedent to nothingness and founds it.  We must interpret this as meaning not only that being has logical priority over nothingness but also that, in concrete terms, it is from being that nothingness derives its efficacy.  We expressed this by saying that nothingness haunts being .  In other words, being can be conceived of without any need of nothingness, and that we can exhaustively explore the notion of being without finding in it the slightest trace of nothingness.  But, on the contrary, the nothingness that is not can have only a borrowed existence: it takes its being from being; we can encounter its nothingness of being only within the limits of being, and being’s total disappearance would not mean the accession of a reign of non-being but, on the contrary, the concomitant disappearance of nothingness; there is non-being only on the surface of being .  IV.  THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL CONCEPTION OF NOTHINGNESS It is true that we can conceive the complementarity of being and nothingness in another way.  We can see both of them as two equally necessary components of reality, but without making being “pass over into” nothingness as Hegel does or insisting, as we were trying to do, that nothingness is logically subsequent: we can emphasize, on the contrary, the reciprocal forces of repulsion that being and non-being exert on each other, such that reality is in some way the tension that results from these antagonistic forces.  Heidegger’s thought is oriented toward this new conception.  23 It takes no time to notice the progress that his theory of Nothingness represents in relation to Hegel’s.  First, being and non-being are no longer empty abstractions.  In his major work Heidegger demonstrated the legitimacy of a questioning of being, where being no longer has the character of a Scholastic universal that it still retained in Hegel: there is a meaning of being that must be elucidated; there is a “preontological understanding” of being contained in all the ways in which “human-reality” behaves, i.e., in each of its projects.  In the same way, the aporias that people habitually raise whenever a philosopher approaches the problem of Nothingness are shown to be unimportant: they are valid only insofar as they limit the use of our intellect, and they only show that this problem lies outside the province of the intellect.  On the contrary, there are numerous attitudes of “human-reality” that imply an “understanding” 24 of nothingness: hatred, prohibition, regret, etc.  There is even the permanent possibility that Dasein may find itself “faced” with nothingness, and encounter it as a phenomenon: that is anguish.  Nonetheless, even though he establishes these possibilities of a concrete apprehension of nothingness, Heidegger does not succumb to Hegel’s mistake: he does not preserve any being for non-being, not even an abstract being; nothingness is not; it nihilates itself.  It is maintained and conditioned by transcendence.  As we know, Heidegger defines the being of human-reality as being-in-the-world.  And the world is the synthetic structure of equipment, in which each part indicates another, in ever wider circles, such that man is acquainted by this structure with what he is.  25 This means at the same time that “human-reality” arises as invested by being, it “finds itself” ( sich befinden ) in being—and that it is human-reality that arranges this being by which it is besieged around itself in the form of a world.  But human-reality can make being appear as a totality organized into a world only by surpassing it.  For Heidegger, all determination is a surpassing, since it presupposes a step taken back, the taking up of a point of view.  And Dasein brings about this surpassing of the world—the condition of the world’s elevation as such 26 — in relation to itself .  Indeed, the characteristic of ipseity ( Selbstheit ) is that man is always separated from what he is by the entire breadth of the being that he is not.  He becomes acquainted with himself from the other side of the world, and he turns back from the horizon toward himself in order to internalize: man is “a being of distances.” 27 It is with the movement of internalization—which traverses all of being—that being arises and is organized as a world, without there being any priority either of the movement over the world or of the world over the movement.  But this appearance of the self beyond the world—in other words, beyond the totality of reality—is the emergence of human-reality in nothingness.  It is only within nothingness that being can be surpassed.  At the same time, the point of view from which being is organized into a world is beyond-the-world—which means, on one hand, that human-reality arises as the emergence of being within non-being and, on the other hand, that the world is “in suspense” 28 within nothingness.  The discovery of this twofold and perpetual nihilation is anguish.  And it is on the basis of this surpassing of the world that Dasein will actualize the world’s contingency; in other words it will pose the question “Why is there something rather than nothing?” Therefore the world’s contingency appears to human-reality, insofar as it has installed itself within nothingness in order to apprehend it.  Here, then, is nothingness encircling being on every side and at the same time expelled from being; here nothingness is given as the means by which the world acquires its contours as a world.  Can we be satisfied by this solution? Of course, we cannot deny that our apprehension of the world as the world is nihilating.  As soon as the world appears as the world, it is given as being no more than that .  Human-reality’s emergence out of nothingness is the necessary counterpart to this apprehension.  But how does human-reality have the power to emerge in this way from non-being? Heidegger is doubtless correct in insisting that negation derives its foundation from nothingness.  But if nothingness can found negation, it is because it envelops within it, as its essential structure, the “ not .” In other words, nothingness does not found negation, either in the manner of an undifferentiated void, or as an instance of alterity that does not posit itself as alterity.  29 It is at the origin of negative judgment because it is itself negation.  It can found negation as an act because it is negation as being .  Nothingness cannot be nothingness without nihilating itself explicitly as the nothingness of the world; in other words, it must explicitly direct itself in its nihilation toward the world in order to constitute itself as the refusal of the world.  Nothingness bears being in its heart.  But how does the emergent being take account of this nihilating refusal? Transcendence, as “a project of itself, beyond…,” cannot found nothingness at all; on the contrary, it is nothingness that is at the very heart of transcendence, and conditions it.  Now, Heidegger’s philosophy is characterized by his use of positive terms for Dasein , all of which disguise implicit negations.  Dasein is “outside itself, in the world,” a “being of distances,” “care,” “its own possibilities,” etc.  This all amounts to saying that Dasein “is not” in itself, that it “is not” in immediate proximity to itself, and that it “surpasses” the world insofar as it posits itself as “not being in itself” and as “not being the world.” In this sense Hegel is in the right, against Heidegger, when he asserts that “Spirit is the negative.” 30 Only we can put the same question to each of them in almost the same form; to Hegel we must say “It is not enough to posit spirit as mediation and the negative; you need to show how the negative is the structure of spirit’s being.  What must spirit be, in order to be able to constitute itself as the negative?” And we can ask Heidegger: “If negation is the primary structure of transcendence, what must the primary structure of human-reality be, in order for it to be able to transcend the world?” In both cases we are shown a negating activity, without any concern to found this activity on a negative being.  And furthermore Heidegger makes nothingness a sort of intentional correlate of transcendence, without seeing that he has already inserted it within transcendence itself as its primordial structure.  But, in addition, what is the point of claiming that nothingness founds negation if what follows is a theory of non-being that, ex hypothesi , severs nothingness from any actual negation? If I emerge out of nothingness beyond the world, how can this extraworldly nothingness found those little lakes of non-being that we encounter at each instant within being? I say that “Pierre is not there,” that “I have no more money,” etc.  Is it really necessary, in order to found these everyday judgments, to surpass the world toward nothingness and then come right back to being? And how is this operation brought about? Not by making the world slide into nothingness but rather—while remaining within the limits of being—by simply withholding an attribute from a subject.  But might it not be said that each withheld attribute, each negated being, is caught up within a single identical extraworldly nothingness, that non-being is like the totality of what is not, that the world is suspended within non-being, like the real within the possibles? In that case one would have to make each negation originate in a specific act of surpassing: the surpassing of being toward the other.  But how could this surpassing be anything but, quite simply, Hegel’s mediation? And haven’t we already asked Hegel—in vain—for the nihilating foundation of mediation? And besides, even if the explanation worked for those simple, radical negations that deny of some particular object any sort of presence within being (“The Centaur does not exist ,” “ There is no reason for him to be late,” “The Ancient Greeks did not practice polygamy”)—negations that might, at a stretch, contribute to the constitution of nothingness as a kind of geometric place of all failed projects, all inaccurate representations, all beings that have disappeared, or whose idea is made up—this interpretation of non-being would not work for a certain type of real particulars 31 —to tell the truth, the most common—that include non-being in their being.  How could we accept that part of them lies within the universe, while a wholly other part lies outside it, in extraworldly nothingness? Take for example the notion of distance, which conditions the determination of a place, or the localization of a point.  It is easy to see that it contains a negative moment: two points are distant when a specific length separates them.  In other words, the length—a positive attribute of some segment of a line—enters in here as the negation of an absolute, undifferentiated proximity.  Some might wish to reduce distance to being no more than the length of the segment of which the two points in question—A and B—are the limits.  But surely they ought to see that in this case we have switched the direction of our attention and that, under cover of the same word, a different object has been given to intuition? The organized complex constituted by the segment with its two limiting terms can, in effect, deliver two different objects of knowledge.  We can present the segment to ourselves as the immediate object of intuition; in that case, the segment will represent a full, concrete tension whose length is a positive attribute, and whose two points A and B appear only as a moment in the structure as a whole, i.e., only insofar as the segment itself implies them as its limits.  In that case negation, expelled from the segment and its length, will take refuge in the two limits : to say that point B is the segment’s limit amounts to saying that the segment does not extend beyond that point.  Here the negation is a secondary structure of the object.  If, on the contrary, we direct our attention to the two points A and B, they show up as immediate objects of intuition against the ground of space.  The segment dissolves as a full, concrete object: it is grasped on the basis of the two points as the void, the negative, that separates them; the negation escapes from the points—which cease to be limits —to impregnate the actual length of the segment, in the capacity of distance .  Thus the total figure, constituted by the segment and its two terms with the negation that is internal to its structure, allows us to apprehend it in two ways.  Or rather, there are two figures and the condition of one of them appearing is the disintegration of the other, just as, in perception, we can constitute one object as the figure by repelling some other object to the point at which it becomes the ground and vice versa .  In each case we find the same amount of negation, which at one moment is contained within the notion of the limits and at the next moment within the notion of distance, but which cannot in any case be eliminated.  Might it be said that the idea of distance is psychological, and that it refers simply to the expanse we have to cross in order to go from point A to point B? We will reply that this “crossing” includes the same negation, since that notion expresses exactly the passive resistance of remoteness.  We are happy to concede, with Heidegger, that human-reality is “de-distancing,” i.e., it arises in the world as the being that creates distances and, at the same time, makes them dissolve ( ent-fernend ).  32 But this de-distancing, even if it is the necessary condition for “there to be” distance in general, contains distance within itself as the negative structure to be overcome.  33 We can try in vain to reduce distance to the simple result of a measurement : what we have seen in the course of the preceding description is that the two points, and the segment included between them, have the indissoluble unity of what the Germans call a “ Gestalt .” Negation is the cement that brings this unity about.  It defines precisely the immediate relationship connecting these two points, which presents them to intuition as the indissoluble unity of distance.  If you claim the distance is reducible to the measurement of a length, you will only cover up this negation, because the negation is the measurement’s raison d’être .  What we have just shown by examining distance might just as well have been pointed out by describing realities such as absence, alteration, alterity, repulsion, regret, absentmindedness, etc.  There is an infinite number of realities that are not only objects of judgment but which are experienced, fought against, feared, etc., by human beings and which are inhabited in their internal structure by negation as a necessary condition of their existence.  We will call them “negatities.” 34 Kant glimpsed their importance when he talked about limitative concepts (the immortality of the soul), a sort of synthesis between the negative and the positive, in which negation is a condition of positivity.  The negation’s function varies according to the nature of the object in question: between the fully positive realities (which nonetheless retain negation as the condition of the sharpness of their contours, as that which fixes them as what they are) and those whose positivity is only an appearance concealing a hole of nothingness, all intermediaries are possible.  In any case it becomes impossible to hurl these negations back into some extraworldly nothingness, as they are conditions of reality, dispersed throughout being and supported by being.  Extraworldly nothingness can account for absolute negation; but we have just discovered a proliferation of intraworldly beings that possess as much reality and efficacy as other beings, but which enclose non-being within themselves.  The explanation they require must remain within the limits of the real.  Nothingness, if it is supported only by being, vanishes as nothingness , and we fall back into being.  Nothingness can only nihilate itself on the ground of being: if nothingness can be given, it is neither before being nor after being; nor is it, in a general way, outside being; rather, it is right inside being, in its heart, like a worm.  V.  THE ORIGIN OF NOTHINGNESS At this point we should cast an eye behind us and take stock of the road we have traveled.  First we raised the question of being.  Then, turning back on this question itself and conceiving it as a type of human behavior , we interrogated it in its turn.  We had then to acknowledge that, if negation did not exist, it would be impossible to raise any question at all—in particular the question of being.  But this negation itself, brought into closer view, directed us to nothingness as its origin and foundation; for there to be negation in the world, and for us to be able in consequence to question ourselves about being, nothingness must in some way be given.  We realized that we cannot conceive of nothingness outside being, nor as a complementary and abstract notion, nor as an infinite medium in which being might be suspended.  Nothingness must be given in the heart of being if we are to be able to apprehend the distinctive type of real particulars designated by us as “negatities.” But being-in-itself is not able to produce this intraworldly nothingness: the notion of being as full positivity does not contain nothingness as one of its structures.  We cannot even say that it excludes it: it stands in no relation at all with it.  Hence the question arises for us now with special urgency: if nothingness cannot be conceived of, either outside being or on the basis of being, and if on the other hand it cannot (because it is non-being) derive from itself the necessary power to “nihilate itself,” where does nothingness come from? To get a firmer grip on the problem we must recognize in the first place that we cannot concede to nothingness the property of “nihilating itself.” Although the verb “to nihilate itself” was conceived in order to remove even the slightest semblance of being from nothingness, we are obliged to acknowledge that only being can nihilate itself, because for something to nihilate itself it is necessary, in some way or other, for it to be.  Now, nothingness is not .  If we can talk about it, that is because it possesses only an appearance of being, a borrowed being, as we noted earlier.  Nothingness is not, but “is been”: 35 nothingness does not nihilate itself but “is nihilated.” Nonetheless, it is true that some being must exist—and it cannot be the in-itself—with the property of nihilating nothingness, of supporting it with its being, of constantly underpinning it by its very existence, a being through which nothingness comes to things .  But how must this being stand in relation to nothingness, in order for it to be the case that nothingness comes to things through it? We must observe first that the being we are envisaging cannot be passive in relation to nothingness: it cannot receive it; nothingness could only come to this being by means of some other being—which would send us on an infinite regress.  But, on the other hand, the being through which nothingness comes to the world cannot produce nothingness while remaining indifferent to this production, like a Stoic cause that produces its effect without undergoing alteration itself.  It is inconceivable that any fully positive being could sustain, and create outside itself, a transcendent nothingness of being—because there would be nothing in being through which it might sublate itself toward non-being.  The being through which nothingness arrives in the world must nihilate nothingness in its being and, even then, it would still run the risk of establishing nothingness as something transcendent in the very heart of immanence, unless it were to nihilate nothingness in its being with respect to its being .  The being through which nothingness arrives in the world is a being in which, in its being, the nothingness of its being is in question: the being through which nothingness comes to the world must be its own nothingness .  And we must not construe this as an act of nihilation—which would in its turn require a foundation in being—but as an ontological characteristic of the being we are seeking.  We have still to find out where—in which delicate and exquisite region of being—we will meet the being that is its own nothingness.  A fuller examination of the behavior that we took as our starting point will assist us in our search.  We must return, therefore, to the activity of questioning.  We saw, it will be recalled, that every question posits, in its essence, the possibility of a negative answer.  In a question we interrogate a being about its being or about its way of being.  And this being, or way of being, is concealed; the possibility always remains open for it to be disclosed as a nothingness.  But it follows, from the very fact of our envisaging that an existent can always disclose itself as nothing , that every question presupposes that we have taken a nihilating step back in relation to the given, which becomes a mere presentation , oscillating between being and nothingness.  What is important, therefore, is the permanent possibility through which any questioner is able to detach himself from the causal series that constitute being, and by which only being can be produced.  Indeed, if we allowed that the question might be determined in the questioner by a universal determinism, it would cease not only to be intelligible but even to be conceivable.  In point of fact, a real cause produces a real effect, and a being that is caused is wholly engaged by its cause within positivity: to the extent that it depends in its being on its cause, it cannot contain the slightest germ of nothingness within it; insofar as a questioner must be able to take a sort of nihilating step back in relation to the thing he is questioning, he escapes from the causal order of the world and extricates himself from the glue of being.  In consequence, through a twofold movement of nihilation, he nihilates the thing he is questioning in relation to himself—by placing it in a neutral state, between being and non-being—and he also nihilates himself in relation to the questioned thing, by separating himself from being in order to draw out from himself the possibility of a non-being.  In this way, any question introduces some measure of negatity 36 into the world: we see nothingness rendering the world iridescent, shimmering on things.  But at the same time the question emanates from a questioner who motivates himself, in his being as questioning, by ungluing himself from being.  It is therefore, by definition, a human process.  Therefore man presents himself, at least in this case, as a being who makes nothingness open up within the world, insofar as he assigns non-being to himself to this end.  We can use these observations as a guiding thread to examine the negatities that we discussed earlier.  They are transcendent realities, beyond any doubt; distance, for example, imposes itself on us as something we have to reckon with, that we must traverse with effort.  Yet these realities have a very special nature: they all immediately underline an essential relation of human-reality with the world.  They originate in a human being’s act, or expectation, or project; all of them underline an aspect of being as it appears to a human being engaged within the world.  And the relations of man with the world that these negatities point toward have nothing in common with the a posteriori relations that emerge from our empirical activity.  Nor is it a matter of those relations of equipmentality 37 through which, according to Heidegger, “human-reality” discovers worldly objects.  Rather, each negatity appears as one of the essential conditions of this relation of equipmentality.  In order for the totality of being to order itself around us in the form of implements—in order for it to break up into differentiated co-referring structures that can be used— it is necessary that negation should arise, not as one thing among other things but as a categorial classification that governs the organization and division of the great masses of being into things.  In this way, man’s elevation in the middle of the being that “invests” him makes it happen that a world is disclosed.  But the essential and primordial moment of this elevation is negation.  Thus we have reached the first goal of this study: man is the being through whom nothingness comes into the world.  But this question immediately provokes another: How must man be in his being, in order that nothingness can come to being through him? Being can only engender being and, if this generative process encompasses man, nothing but being can come from him.  If he must be able to interrogate this process—which is to say, to put it in question—he must be able to hold it up to view as a totality—that is, to place himself outside being and, in so doing, to weaken the structure of being’s being.  However, human-reality does not possess the ability to annihilate, even temporarily, the mass of being placed before it.  What it can modify is its relation to that being.  To disconnect some particular existent, for human-reality, is to disconnect itself in relation to it.  In this case human-reality escapes the existent and cannot be acted on by it; it is out of reach, having withdrawn beyond a nothingness .  Descartes, following the Stoics, gave a name to this possibility of human-reality, the possibility of secreting a nothingness that isolates it: it is freedom .  But here freedom is only a word.  If we wish to go further into the question, we cannot be content with this answer and we must go on to ask: What must human freedom be if nothingness must come to the world through it? It is not yet possible for us to deal with the problem of freedom in its full extent.  38 In fact, the steps that we have taken so far show clearly that freedom is not a faculty of the human mind that can be contemplated and described in isolation.  What we were trying to define was man’s being insofar as he conditions the appearing of nothingness, and this being has appeared to us as freedom.  In this way freedom, as the condition required for nothingness’s nihilation, cannot be a property that belongs, along with others, to the essence of a human being.  Moreover, we have already noted that, for man, the relation of existence to essence is not the same as for worldly things.  Human freedom precedes man’s essence and makes it possible; the human being’s essence is in suspense in his freedom.  It is therefore impossible to distinguish freedom, in the sense in which we refer to it, from human-reality’s being .  Man does not exist first in order to be free later ; rather, there is no difference between man’s being and his being-free .  At this point, therefore, we will not fully address a question that can be exhaustively considered only in the light of a rigorous elucidation of the human being; rather, we need to deal with freedom in connection with the problem of nothingness, and strictly to the extent that it conditions its appearing.  It is evident from the outset that human-reality can only separate itself from the world—through a question, methodical doubt, skeptical doubt, the ἐποχή, etc.—if by nature it is a self-separation.  This was seen by Descartes, who founds doubt on freedom by claiming for us the possibility of suspending our judgments—and, after him, by Alain.  It is in this sense, too, that Hegel affirms the freedom of spirit, to the extent that spirit is mediation, i.e., the Negative.  And furthermore, one of the directions taken by contemporary philosophy has been to discern in human consciousness a kind of escaping from itself: that is the meaning of Heidegger’s transcendence; intentionality is also—in Husserl and Brentano—characterized in more than one respect by its self-separation.  But we will not consider freedom as the internal structure of consciousness now: for the moment we lack the instruments and the technique that might enable us to succeed in this enterprise.  What interests us at present is a temporal operation, since questioning is, like doubt, a way of behaving: it presupposes that the human being first rests within being, and then separates himself from it by taking a nihilating step back.  What we are regarding here as the condition of nihilation is therefore a self-relation within a temporal process.  We want simply to demonstrate that, if we assimilate consciousness to an indefinitely continued causal sequence, we transmute it into a plenitude of being and in so doing we return it to the unlimited totality of being—as we can see in the futile attempts to dissociate psychological determinism from universal determinism, and to constitute it as a separate series.  The absent person’s bedroom, the books he leafed through, the objects he touched, are only, in themselves, books , objects , i.e., they are full actualities: even the traces he has left can be interpreted as his traces only within a situation from which he is already posited as absent.  Taken alone, the dog-eared book, with its worn pages, is not a book whose pages Pierre has turned or whose pages he is no longer turning: it is a volume with worn, folded pages.  If we consider it as my perception’s present and transcendent motivation, or even as the synthetic and rule-governed flux of my sensory impressions, it can point no further than itself, or to objects that are present, to the light that illuminates it, the table that supports it.  It would be pointless to invoke an association of contiguity, as Plato does in his Phaedo , that can make an image of the absent person appear in the margin of one’s perception of the lyre, or the zither, that he touched.  Such an image, if we consider it in itself and in the spirit of the classical theories, is a specific plenitude, a concrete and positive psychological fact.  It follows that a judgment about it whose negativity faces two ways will be required: subjectively, in order to signify that the image is not a perception; and objectively, in order to deny in relation to this Pierre of whom I am forming an image that he is there at present.  This is the famous problem of the characteristics of the true image that has preoccupied so many psychologists, from Taine to Spaier.  39 We can see that association does not eliminate the problem: it pushes it back to the level of reflection.  But, in any case, association demands a negation, which is to say at the least that consciousness has to take a nihilating step back from the image that it apprehends as a subjective phenomenon, in order to establish it, precisely, as being no more than a subjective phenomenon.  Now I have tried to show elsewhere 40 that if we first present the image as a renascent perception, it is radically impossible to distinguish it later from our current perceptions.  The image must contain within its very structure a nihilating thesis.  It constitutes itself as an image by positing its object as existing elsewhere or as not existing.  It carries within itself a twofold negation: it is in the first place a nihilation of the world (insofar as it is not the world that is presently providing, as an actual object of perception, the object aimed at in the image), and then a nihilation of the object of the image (insofar as it is posited as non-actual) and, at the same time, a nihilation of itself (insofar as it is not a full and concrete mental process).  It would be futile to try to explain my apprehension of Pierre’s absence in the bedroom by invoking Husserl’s well-known “empty intentions” that are, in large part, constitutive of perception.  Between the different perceptual intentions, there are indeed relations of motivation (but motivation is not causation), and some of these intentions are full—which is to say fulfilled by what they aim at—while others are empty.  But, as the matter that is supposed to fulfill the empty intentions is, precisely, what is not , that matter cannot be what motivates them in their structure.  And as the other intentions are fulfilled, they cannot motivate empty intentions, insofar as they are empty, either.  Moreover these intentions are psychological in nature, and it would be a mistake to envisage them in the manner of things, i.e., as recipients that can in the first place be given and are—on a case-to-case basis—either empty or fulfilled, and which remain in their nature indifferent as to their state of emptiness or fulfillment.  It seems that Husserl did not always escape this reifying illusion.  To be empty, an intention must be conscious of itself as empty, and precisely as empty of the precise matter it aims at.  An empty intention constitutes itself as empty to just that degree to which it posits its matter as inexistent or absent.  In brief, an empty intention is consciousness of a negation that transcends itself toward an object that it posits as absent or nonexistent.  Thus, whatever explanation we give of it, for Pierre’s absence to be noted or felt, a negative moment is required in which consciousness, in the absence of any antecedent determination, constitutes itself as negation.  In conceiving, on the basis of my perceptions of the bedroom that he lived in, the person who is no longer in the bedroom, I must necessarily perform an act of thought that cannot be determined or motivated by any antecedent state; in short, I must instantiate within myself a break with being.  And as I make continual use of negatities to isolate and determine the existents—in other words, to think them—the succession of my “consciousnesses” constantly detaches each effect from its cause, since any nihilating process requires that its source should come only from itself.  Insofar as my present state is a continuation of my previous state, any fissure through which negation might slip will be entirely blocked.  Therefore any psychological process of nihilation implies a break between the immediate psychological past and the present.  This break is, precisely, nothingness.  It might be argued that at least the possibility remains of successive implication between the processes of nihilation.  My noticing of Pierre’s absence could still determine my regret at not seeing him; we have not excluded the possibility of a determinism of nihilations.  But, in addition to the fact that the first nihilation in the series must necessarily be detached from the previous positive processes, what could a motivation of nothingness by nothingness possibly mean? A being can of course constantly nihilate itself , but to the extent that it nihilates itself it can no longer be the origin of any other phenomenon, not even of a second nihilation.  We still need to explain what this separation is, this disjoining of acts of consciousness that conditions every negation.  If we examine the earlier state of consciousness, envisaging it as a motivation, it will be immediately obvious that nothing has entered in, sliding between that state and the present state.  There has been no break in continuity within the flux of unfolding time: otherwise we would be back with the unacceptable conception of time as infinitely divisible, and of the temporal point, or instant, as the limit of division.  Nor has any opaque element been suddenly intercalated, separating earlier from later, as a knife’s blade can separate a fruit into two.  Nor has there been any weakening of the motivating power of the earlier state of consciousness: it remains what it is, and loses nothing of its urgency.  What separates earlier from later is precisely nothing .  And this nothing is insurmountable, just because it is nothing, for in any obstacle to be surmounted something positive is given as needing to be surmounted.  But in the case we are dealing with here, we will seek in vain for any resistance to be broken or any obstacle to be surmounted.  The earlier consciousness is always there (although modified with “pastness”), it still maintains a relation of interpenetration with the present consciousness, but, against the ground of this existential relation, it is taken out of play, disconnected, bracketed—exactly as the world is bracketed, in the outlook of someone practicing the phenomenological ἐποχή, both within and outside him.  Thus, the condition of human-reality’s ability to negate all or part of the world is that it bears nothingness within it as the nothing that separates its present from all of its past.  But that is not the whole of it—for, envisaged like this, the nothing does not yet have the meaning of nothingness: it is a suspension of being that remains without a name, that is not conscious of suspending being, that comes from outside consciousness and has the effect of cutting it into two, by reintroducing opacity within that absolute lucidity.  41 In addition, such a nothing would in no way be negative.  Nothingness, as we saw earlier, is the foundation of negation because it holds negation within it, because it is negation as being.  Therefore the conscious being must constitute himself in relation to his past as separated from that past by a nothingness; he must be conscious of this breach in being, but not as a phenomenon that he undergoes: as a structure of consciousness that he is.  Freedom is the human being putting his past out of play by secreting his own nothingness.  We must be clear that this basic necessity of being its own nothingness does not appear to consciousness intermittently, on the occasion of particular negations: there is no moment of psychological life in which negative or interrogative forms of behavior do not appear, at least as secondary structures; and consciousness continually lives itself as the nihilation of its past being.  But here, it may well be surmised, an objection that we have frequently raised can be turned back against us: if the nihilating consciousness exists only as a consciousness of nihilation, it ought to be possible to define and to describe a constant mode of consciousness, present as consciousness, that is the consciousness of nihilation.  Does this consciousness exist? Here, therefore, a new question arises for us: if freedom is the being of consciousness, consciousness must be as a consciousness of freedom.  What form does this consciousness of freedom take? In freedom, the human being is its own past (as it is, also, its own future) in the form of nihilation.  If our analyses have not led us astray, there must exist for the human being, insofar as he is conscious of being, some specific way of confronting his past and his future as being this past and this future and, at the same time, as not being them.  We can provide an immediate response to this question: it is in anguish that man becomes conscious of his freedom or, alternatively, anguish is freedom’s mode of being as consciousness of being; it is in anguish that freedom is, in its being, in question for itself.  Kierkegaard, in his description of anguish before sin, characterizes it as anguish in the face of freedom.  But Heidegger—who, as we know, was greatly influenced by Kierkegaard 42 —considers anguish, on the contrary, as the apprehension of nothingness.  To us, these two descriptions of anguish do not seem contradictory: on the contrary, each of them implies the other.  First, we must find in Kierkegaard’s favor: anguish is distinguished from fear by the fact that fear is fear of beings in the world, and anguish is anguish before myself.  Vertigo is anguish to the extent that I am frightened not of falling into the precipice but of throwing myself into it.  A situation that provokes fear, insofar as it threatens to change my life and my being from outside, provokes anguish to the extent to which I mistrust my own reactions to this situation.  The preparation of artillery that precedes an attack may provoke fear in the soldier undergoing the bombardment, but he will begin to feel anguish when he tries to foresee the behavior through which he will resist the bombardment, when he wonders if he will be able to “hold out.” Similarly, the mobilized soldier who joins his depot at the start of the war may, in some cases, fear death, but far more frequently he feels “fear of fear,” which is to say anguish before himself.  Most of the time, dangerous or threatening situations are multifaceted: they are apprehended with a feeling of fear, or a feeling of anguish, according to whether the situation is envisaged as acting upon the man, or the man as acting on the situation.  The man who has just suffered “a hard knock,” who has lost a large part of his resources in a financial crash, may fear the poverty that threatens.  The next moment he will feel anguish as, nervously wringing his hands (a symbolic reaction to the action demanded of him, but which remains entirely indeterminate), he cries, “What am I going to do? But what am I going to do?” In this sense, fear and anguish each exclude the other, since fear is an unreflective apprehension of something transcendent, and anguish is a reflective apprehension of oneself; each is born from the other’s destruction, and the typical process, in the case I have just given, is a constant transition from one to the other.  But there are also situations in which anguish appears in its pure state without ever being preceded or followed by fear.  If, for example, I have been promoted to a new rank and put in charge of some delicate and flattering mission, I may feel anguish at the thought that perhaps I will not be capable of accomplishing it, without feeling the slightest fear of the consequences of my possible failure.  What is the meaning of anguish, in the various examples I have just given? Let us return to the example of vertigo.  Vertigo is introduced through fear: I am on a narrow path without a parapet that borders a chasm.  The chasm presents itself to me as something to be avoided ; it represents a danger of death.  At the same time I can conceive of a number of causes, in accordance with universal determinism, that can transform this death threat into a reality: I may slip on a stone and fall into the abyss; the crumbly earth of the path may collapse under my tread.  These various predictions present me to myself as a thing: I am passive in relation to these possibilities, which come to me from outside; insofar as I am also a worldly object, subject to the law of gravity, these possibilities are not mine .  At this moment fear appears, in which I apprehend myself in this situation as one destructible transcendent item among others, as an object that does not contain within itself the origin of its future disappearance.  My reaction will be reflective in type: I will “pay attention” to the stones on the road, and I will stay as far away as I can from the path’s edge.  I actualize myself as resisting the threatening situation with all my strength, and I plan ahead for myself a number of future courses of action, whose purpose is to distance myself from the world’s threats.  These strategies are my possibilities.  43 I escape fear by the very fact of placing myself in a framework where my own possibilities are substituted for the transcendent probabilities in which human activity had no place.  But these strategies, precisely because they are my possibilities, do not appear to me as being determined by external causes.  Not only is it not absolutely certain that they will be effective but above all it is not absolutely certain that they will be upheld, for their existence is not self-sufficient: one might say, distorting Berkeley’s phrase, that their “being is a being-upheld” and that their “possibility of being is no more than an ought-to-be-upheld.” 44 Given this, the possibility of contradictory courses of action ( not paying attention to the stones on the path; running; thinking about something else) and of contrary courses of action (setting off to throw myself into the chasm) is a necessary condition of their possibility.  45 The possible that I make into my concrete possible can only appear as my possible by detaching itself against the ground of the totality of logical possibilities that the situation allows.  But these rejected possibles, in turn, have no being other than their “being-upheld”; I am the one who sustains them in being and, conversely, their present non-being is an “ought not to be upheld.” No external cause will set them aside.  I alone am the permanent source of their non-being, and I commit myself within them: to make my possible appear, I posit the other possibles—in order to nihilate them.  That would not produce anguish if I were able to apprehend myself in my relations with these possibles as a cause producing its effects.  In that case, the effect that was defined as my possible would be strictly determined.  But then it would cease to be possible ; it would become merely forth-coming.  46 If, therefore, I wanted to avoid anguish and vertigo, it would be sufficient for me to be able to regard the motives (my instinct for self-preservation, my earlier fear, etc.) that make me reject the envisaged situation as determining my subsequent behavior, 47 in the way in which the presence of a given mass at a particular point determines the paths taken by other masses: it would require me to grasp within myself a strict psychological determinism.  But I feel anguish just because my courses of action are only possible and this means precisely that, while they constitute a set of motives for resisting this situation, I grasp these motives at the same time as insufficiently effective.  At the very moment when I apprehend myself as horrified of the chasm, I am conscious of this horror as not being determining in relation to my possible behavior.  In one sense, my horror is a call for prudent behavior, it is in itself an initial sketch of this behavior, and—in another sense—it posits the subsequent developments of this behavior as only possible precisely because I do not grasp it as causing those subsequent developments but as a requirement, an appeal, etc., etc.  Now, as we have seen, the consciousness of being is the being of consciousness.  Here, therefore, we will not find some contemplative state that I might subsequently direct at an already constituted horror: it is the very being of horror to appear to itself as not being a cause of the behavior it calls for.  In brief, to avoid fear, which abandons me to a strictly determined transcendent future, I take refuge in reflection—but this latter can offer me only an undetermined future.  In other words, by constituting a specific course of action as possible , and precisely because it is my possible, I realize that nothing can oblige me to take this action.  Yet I am situated over there, in the future; indeed it is the person who I will be in a moment, at the bend of the path, that I am striving toward with all my strength, and in this sense there is already a relation between my future being and my present being.  But, within this relation, a nothingness has slid: I am not the person who I will be.  First, I am not he because I am separated from him by time and, in addition, because what I am is not the foundation of what I will be.  Finally, I am not he because no current existent can determine strictly what I will be.  As, however, I am already what I will be (otherwise I would have no interest in being any particular way), I am the one who I will be in the mode of not being he .  It is through my horror that I am carried toward the future and, insofar as it constitutes the future as possible, my horror nihilates itself.  It is precisely the consciousness of being one’s own future, in the mode of not-being, that we call anguish .  And the positive counterpart to the nihilation of my horror as a reason —whose effect is to reinforce my horror as a state —is that other courses of action (in particular the one that consists in my throwing myself into the chasm) appear as my possible possibles .  If nothing constrains me to save my life, nothing prevents me from hurling myself into the abyss.  The decisive behavior will emanate from a “me” that I am not yet, to exactly the extent to which the “me” that I am not yet does not depend on the “me” that I am.  And my vertigo appears as my grasp of this dependence.  I approach the chasm, and the person below it, whom I seek out with my gaze, is me.  From that moment on, I am playing with my possibles.  My eyes, scanning the abyss from top to bottom, rehearse my possible fall and symbolically actualize it; at the same time, the act of suicide, due to its becoming “my” possible “possible,” reveals in its turn some possible reasons for adopting it (suicide would bring my anguish to an end).  Fortunately these reasons, in their turn—by virtue simply of their being reasons for a possible—are presented as inefficacious and not as determining: they can no more produce my suicide than my horror of falling can determine me to avoid it.  It is this counter-anguish that in general brings anguish to an end by transmuting it into indecision.  That indecision, in its turn, calls for decision; suddenly, we move away from the edge of the chasm and continue on our way.  The example we have just analyzed has shown us what we might call “anguish in the face of the future.” There is another kind: anguish in the face of the past.  This is the anguish of the gambler who has freely and sincerely decided to stop playing and who, when he approaches the “green baize,” suddenly sees his resolutions “dissolve.” This phenomenon has often been described as if the mere sight of the gaming table brings out some tendency in us that enters into conflict with our earlier resolution, and ends up dragging us away in spite of it.  Apart from the fact that such a description is couched in reifying language, and populates the mind with antagonistic forces (as, for example, in the moralistes ’ 48 well-known “struggle between reason and the passions”), it does not account for the facts.  In reality—and we have the testimony of Dostoyevsky’s letters—there is nothing in us that resembles an internal debate, as if we had to weigh up our reasons and motives for acting before deciding.  49 The earlier resolution to “stop playing” is still there and in most cases the gambler present at the gaming table will turn back to it, to seek its help: for he does not want to play; or rather, having made his resolution the night before, he still thinks of himself as no longer wanting to play; he believes his resolution might be effective.  But what he grasps then, in anguish, is precisely the total inefficacy of his past resolution.  It is there, of course, but frozen, inefficacious, surpassed , by virtue of the very fact that I am conscious of it.  It is still part of me , to the extent that my identity with myself is constantly being actualized through the temporal flux, but, due to its being for my consciousness, it is no longer me .  I escape it; it fails in the mission I had assigned to it.  It is still there, and I am it in the mode of not-being.  What the gambler grasps at this moment is again the constant break in determinism, the nothingness separating him from himself: I would have liked so much to stop playing; yesterday I even grasped the situation, in a synthetic apprehension (the threat of ruin, the despair of my loved ones), as prohibiting me from playing.  It seemed to me that I had thereby constituted a real barrier between myself and the game, and suddenly now I realize that this synthetic apprehension is only the memory of an idea, the memory of a feeling.  For it to help me again, I must reproduce it ex nihilo , and freely; it is only one of my possibles, just as the fact of playing is another, neither more nor less.  This fear of destroying my family needs me to rediscover it, to re-create it as a lived fear; it stands behind me like a boneless ghost, and depends on me alone to lend it my flesh.  I am alone and naked before temptation, as I was last night and, after having patiently constructed barricades and walls, having locked myself into the magic circle of a resolution, I realize with anguish that nothing can prevent me from playing.  And the anguish is me , since, by the mere fact of bearing myself in existence as consciousness of being, I make myself as not being this past of good resolutions that I am .  It would be pointless to object that the unique condition of this anguish is my ignorance of the underlying psychological determinism—that I am anxious for want of knowledge of the true and efficacious motives, in the shadows of my unconscious, that determine my action.  We can reply by saying that, in the first place, we have not regarded anguish as a proof of human freedom: this latter presented itself as the necessary condition of questioning.  We simply wanted to show that there is a specific way of being conscious of freedom, and this way of being conscious is anguish.  In other words, our aim was to establish anguish in its essential structure as a consciousness of freedom.  Now, from this point of view, the existence of psychological determinism would not invalidate the outcome of our description; anguish could be an unknowing ignorance of this determinism, in which case it does indeed grasp itself as freedom.  Or, instead, one might claim that anguish is a consciousness of not knowing the true causes of our actions.  In this case, the source of anguish would be our sense of the monstrous motives, lurking in the depths of our being, that might suddenly unleash sinful acts.  But in that case we would appear to ourselves as things in the world and we ourselves would be our own transcendent situation.  In that case anguish would dissolve to make way for fear , because the synthetic apprehension of something transcendent as fearful is fear.  We can characterize this freedom, disclosed to us in anguish, in terms of the existence of this nothing that insinuates itself between my motives and my act.  It is not because I am free that my act escapes determination by my motives but, on the contrary, the structure of my motives as inefficacious is the condition of my freedom.  And if we are asked what this nothing that founds freedom is, our reply will be that it cannot be described, since it is not , but that its meaning at least can be elicited, insofar as this nothing is been by the human being in his relations with himself.  It corresponds to the fact that, necessarily, a motive can only appear as a motive as the correlative of one’s consciousness of that motive.  In short, as soon as we give up the hypothesis that there are any contents of consciousness, we are obliged to recognize that a motive is never in consciousness: it is only for consciousness.  And owing to the very fact that a motive can arise only as an appearance, it constitutes itself as inefficacious.  Of course, it does not have the externality of a spatio-temporal thing; it still belongs to subjectivity and is grasped as mine , but it is by nature a transcendence within immanence, and consciousness escapes it through its own positing of it, since now the task of bestowing upon it its meaning and its importance belongs to consciousness.  In this way the nothing that separates the motive from consciousness can be characterized as a transcendence within immanence; it is in producing itself as something immanent that consciousness nihilates the nothing that makes it exist for itself as transcendent.  But we can see that this nothingness, the condition of every transcendent negation, can be elucidated only on the basis of two other primordial nihilations: (1) consciousness is not its own motive insofar as it is empty of any content.  This directs us to the nihilating structure of the prereflective cogito ; (2) consciousness relates to its past and its future as to a self that it is in the mode of not-being.  This directs us to a nihilating structure of temporality.  It is not yet possible for us to elucidate these two types of nihilation: at present we do not have the necessary techniques at our disposal.  It will suffice to point out that a definitive explanation of negation cannot be provided without a description of consciousness (of) self and of temporality.  What we should note here is that the freedom manifested through anguish is characterized by a constantly renewed obligation to remake the Me by which the free being is designated.  When we showed, just now, that my possibles are a source of anguish because it depends on me alone to maintain their existence, we did not mean to say that they derive from a me —a me that is, at least in this case, given from the outset, and passes from one state of consciousness to another within the flux of time.  The gambler who must carry out anew his synthetic apperception of a situation able to prohibit him from playing must reinvent at the same time a me who is able to assess this situation, who is “in a situation.” This “me,” with its a priori and historical content, is man’s essence .  And anguish, as the manifestation of the freedom it confronts, signifies that man is always separated from his essence by a nothingness.  Here we should repeat Hegel’s phrase: “ Wesen ist was gewesen ist.” 50 Essence is what has been.  A human being’s essence is everything that can be indicated about him by the words “that is .” It is thereby the totality of features that can explain an act.  But the act is always beyond this essence, and it is a human act only insofar as it goes beyond any explanation that we can give of it—precisely because everything about a man that can be designated by the phrase “that is” has, by virtue of this very fact, been .  Man continually carries with him a prejudicative understanding of his essence, but, in consequence, he is separated from it by a nothingness.  The essence of human-reality is everything it apprehends about itself as having been .  And this is where anguish appears as an apprehension of oneself as existing in the perpetual mode of a separation from what is, or, better still, as making oneself exist as such.  Indeed, we can never apprehend any “ Erlebnis ” as a living consequence of our own nature .  This nature is constituted as our consciousness flows, but it always remains behind us, and it haunts us as the constant object of our retrospective understanding.  It is insofar as this nature is a demand, without being a resource, that we apprehend it as a cause of anguish.  In anguish, freedom is the source of its own anguish, insofar as nothing either solicits or impedes that freedom.  Still, it might be said, we have just defined freedom as a permanent structure of the human being: if anguish manifests freedom, it ought to be my permanent affective state.  But it is on the contrary wholly exceptional.  How can we explain the rarity of the phenomenon of anguish? In the first place we should note that the most common situations in our lives—where we apprehend our possibles as such in and through our actively bringing those possibles about—do not manifest themselves to us through anguish because their very structure makes any anguished apprehension of them impossible.  Anguish, in fact, implies that I recognize a possibility as my possibility; in other words, it constitutes itself when consciousness views itself as cut off from its essence by nothingness, or separated from the future by its very freedom.  Put differently, a nihilating nothing deprives me of all excuses and, at the same time, whatever I project as my future being is always nihilated and reduced to the level of mere possibility, because the future that I am remains beyond my reach.  But we should note that we are dealing, in these various cases, with a temporal form in which I await myself in the future, in which I “arrange to meet myself in an hour, or a day, or a month, from now.” Anguish is the misgiving that I will not attend that meeting, that I will no longer even want to attend it.  But I can also find myself engaged in actions that, in the very moment of actualizing my possibilities, reveal them to me.  It is in the act of lighting this cigarette that I learn about my concrete possibility of smoking or, alternatively, my desire to smoke.  It is by means of the very act of pulling this sheet of paper and this pen toward me that I confer upon myself, as my most immediate possibility, the task of working on this book: there I am, engaged within it, and discovering it at the very moment at which I have already thrown myself into it.  At this instant, of course, it remains my possibility, since at any moment I can turn aside from my work, push away my notebook, screw the lid onto my pen.  But this possibility of interrupting my action is relegated to a secondary place, because the action revealed to me through my act has a tendency to crystallize into a transcendent and relatively independent shape.  The consciousness of a man in action is unreflected consciousness.  It is a consciousness of something, and the transcendent thing disclosed to it is of a distinctive kind: it is a structure of requirement that belongs to the world, within which various complex equipmental relations are correlatively discovered.  In the act of forming the letters I am forming, the complete sentence—still unfinished—takes the shape of a passive requirement that it be formed.  The sentence is the very meaning of the letters that I form, and its summons is not called into question, since, precisely, I cannot form the words without transcending them toward it, and I encounter it as the necessary condition of the meaning of the words I am forming.  At the same time, and within the act’s very framework, an indicative structure of implements shows and organizes itself (pen-ink-paper-lines-margin, etc.).  We cannot grasp this structure in its own right; instead, it arises within the movement of transcendence that reveals to me, as a passive requirement, the sentence I am to write.  In this way, within the quasi-generality of daily actions, I am committed, I have placed my bets and I discover my possibles as I actualize them—and in the very process of actualizing them—as requirements, matters of urgency, structures of equipment.  And of course in any act of this type the possibility remains of calling the act into question, insofar as my act points toward more distant and more essential aims, along with its ultimate meanings and my essential possibilities.  For example, the sentence I am writing is the meaning of the letters I am forming, but the sentence’s meaning is the complete work I wish to produce.  And this work is a possibility in relation to which I can feel anguish: it really is my possible, and I do not know if I will continue it tomorrow; tomorrow, my freedom may exercise its nihilating power in relation to it.  Only this anguish implies the apprehension of the work as such as my possibility: I must confront it directly, and actualize my relation to it.  The questions I must ask about it, therefore, are not only objective ones, of the following type: “Should this book be written?”—since these questions merely direct me to wider objective meanings, such as “ Is this moment an opportune time to write it?”; “Doesn’t it overlap with this other book?”; “Is its subject of sufficient interest?”; “Have I sufficiently thought it through?”; etc.—where all of these meanings remain transcendent, and are given as a host of requirements from the world.  In order for my freedom to feel anguish in relation to the book I am writing, this book has to appear in its relationship to me: in other words, I must encounter, on the one hand, my essence , as what I have been (I have been “wanting to write this book,” I conceived of it, I thought that it might be interesting to write it, and I have constituted myself in such a way that I can no longer be understood without taking account of the fact that the book has been my essential possible), and, on the other hand, the nothingness separating my freedom from that essence ( I have been “wanting to write it” but nothing , not even what I have been, can force me to write it), and, last, the nothingness separating me from what I will be (I encounter the permanent possibility of abandoning it as the very condition of possibility of writing it and as the very meaning of my freedom).  I have to grasp my freedom—in the very act through which I constitute the book as my possible—insofar as it may possibly destroy what I am, in the present and the future.  In other words, I have to adopt the standpoint of reflection.  As long as I remain at the level of the act, the book to be written is only the distant meaning presupposed by the act which reveals my possibles to me.  It is only the act’s implication, and it is not thematized and posited in itself; there is no “question” of it.  I do not conceive of the book either as necessary or as contingent; it is only the distant and permanent meaning on the basis of which I can understand what I am writing now and, on this account, it is conceived of as being .  In other words, it is only by positing it as the existing ground , against which my present and existing sentence emerges, that I can confer upon my sentence a determinate meaning.  Now, we are thrown into the world at every moment, and committed within it.  We act, therefore, before we have posited our possibles, and these possibles—which are revealed as having been actualized, or as in the process of being actualized—direct us to meanings that can be called into question only by some special action.  The alarm clock that rings in the morning refers to the possibility of going to my work, which is my possibility.  But to grasp the alarm clock’s call as a call is to get up.  The act itself of getting up is therefore reassuring, because it avoids the question: “Is work my possibility?” and in consequence it does not enable me to grasp the possibility of quietism, of a rejection of work and, ultimately, a rejection of the world and of death.  51 In brief, insofar as I grasp the meaning of the alarm bell by being already on my feet when it sounds, this understanding protects me from the anguished intuition that the person who confers on the alarm clock its requirement is me: it is me, and me alone.  In the same way, what we might refer to as “everyday morality” excludes any ethical anguish.  Ethical anguish arises when I consider myself in my original relation to values.  These requirements, in point of fact, stand in need of a foundation.  But there is no circumstance in which this foundation could be being , because any value whose ideal nature was founded on its being would thereby cease to be a value, and would render my will heteronomous.  Value derives its being from the requirement it makes, not its requirement from its being.  It cannot therefore be given to some contemplative intuition, capable of grasping it as being a value and, in so doing, of stripping it of any rights in relation to my freedom.  But, on the contrary, value can be disclosed only to an active freedom, a freedom that makes it exist as a value by the mere fact of recognizing it as such.  It follows that my freedom is the unique foundation of values and that nothing —absolutely nothing—can justify my adopting this system of values rather than that one.  As the being through whom values exist, I am unjustifiable.  And my freedom is beset by anguish at being the foundation—without foundation—of values.  In addition, it is beset by anguish because, as values are essentially revealed to a freedom, they cannot be disclosed without at the same time being “called into question,” since the possibility of reversing the system of values appears complementarily as my possibility.  The anguish experienced in relation to values is a recognition of those values’ ideality.  But usually my attitude toward values is profoundly reassuring.  This is because I am, in effect, committed within a world of values.  The anguished perception of values as being maintained in being by my freedom is a subsequent and mediated phenomenon.  What is immediate is the world with its urgency and, in this world in which I am committed, my acts make values spring up like birds flying up from a tree: 52 it is through my indignation that I am given “baseness” as an anti-value, through my admiration that I am given “greatness” as a value.  And, above all, my obedience—which is real—to a host of taboos reveals these taboos as existing in fact.  It is not after their contemplation of moral values that the bourgeois who call themselves “decent people” become decent; rather they are thrown, from the moment they arrive in the world, into a pattern of behavior whose meaning is “decency.” In this way decency acquires a being and is not called into question; values are strewn along my path like a thousand minor requirements, like the signs prohibiting me from walking on the grass.  Thus, in what we may call the “world of immediacy”—given to our unreflective consciousness—we do not appear to ourselves first , in order to be thrown subsequently into our undertakings.  Rather, our being is immediately “in situation,” which means it arises within our undertakings and knows itself in the first instance insofar as it reflects on them.  We are therefore revealed to ourselves within a world populated by requirements, in the midst of plans that are “in progress”: I am writing; I am going to smoke; I have an appointment this evening with Pierre; I must not forget to reply to Simon; I have no right to conceal the truth any longer from Claude.  In truth, the meaning of all these minor passive expectations on the part of reality, of all these banal and everyday values, derives from an initial project of myself, which is akin to my choice of myself within the world.  But in fact this project of myself, aiming at a fundamental possibility which gives rise to the existence of values, appeals, expectations, and a world in general, only appears to me—from the other side of the world—as the abstract and logical meaning and significance of my initiatives.  Apart from that, there are the concrete instances of alarm clocks, signposts, tax returns, policemen—all of them safeguards against anguish.  But as soon as a distance separates me from my undertaking, as soon as I am directed back to myself because I have to await myself in the future, I suddenly encounter myself as the person who bestows meaning on the alarm clock, the person who prohibits himself—on the basis of a signpost—from walking on a flowerbed or a lawn, the person who lends the boss’s order its urgency, the person who decides the interest of the book that he is writing, the person who, finally, makes values exist in order to determine his action in accordance with their requirements.  I emerge alone and in anguish to confront the unique and basic project that constitutes my being; nihilated by my consciousness of my freedom, all barriers and safeguards crumble.  I have no recourse, and I cannot have recourse, to any value to set against the fact that it is I who maintain values in being; nothing can insure me against myself, cut off from the world and from my essence by this nothingness that I am.  I have to actualize the meaning of the world and of my essence: I decide it alone, without any justification or excuse.  Anguish is therefore freedom’s reflective self-apprehension: in this sense it is a mediation, because—although it is immediately conscious of itself—it arises out of the negation of the calls made upon me by the world; it appears as soon as I disengage from the world in which I was committed, to apprehend myself as a consciousness with a preontological understanding of its essence, and a prejudicative sense of its possibles; it is opposed to the spirit of seriousness, which grasps values on the basis of the world and reassures us by conferring a reifying substance on values.  In being “serious,” I define myself on the basis of some object, setting aside as a priori impossible any plan that I am not in the process of pursuing, and grasping the meaning my freedom has given to the world as if it came from the world, as if it constituted my obligations and my being.  In anguish, I apprehend myself at the same time as being completely free, and as not being able to alter the world so that its meaning did not come from me.  However, it would be a mistake to think that all that is needed, in order to grasp oneself in a pure state of anguish, is to move to the reflective level and consider one’s distant or immediate possibles.  Every case of reflection gives birth to anguish, as a structure of reflective consciousness insofar as it considers its reflected consciousness; but I can still behave in various ways in relation to my own anguish and, in particular, there are various ways of fleeing from it.  Indeed, everything happens as if one’s immediate and essential response to anguish was to flee from it.  Before being a theoretical conception, psychological determinism is in the first instance a course of action that aims to excuse or, alternatively, the foundation of every course of action that aims to excuse.  In relation to anguish, it is a reflective strategy: it claims that there are antagonistic forces in us whose type of existence is comparable to that of things; it attempts to fill the holes that surround us, to reinstate the ties between past and present, present and future; it endows us with a nature that produces our acts, and it turns those acts themselves into transcendent entities; it confers an inertia and externality on our acts, thereby assigning their foundation to something outside themselves and rendering them—insofar as they make up a continual interplay of excuses —profoundly reassuring; it denies human-reality’s transcendence, a transcendence that leads it to emerge, beyond its own essence, into anguish; at the same time, by reducing us to only ever being what we are , it reintroduces into us the absolute positivity of being-in-itself and, in so doing, it reintegrates us within being.  But this determinism, used as a reflective defense against anguish, is not given as a reflective intuition .  It is powerless against the evidence of freedom, and it presents itself therefore as a belief in which we may take refuge, as the ideal term toward which we might flee from our anguish.  That is shown, in the area of philosophy, by the fact that psychological determinists do not claim to base their thesis on the pure data of internal observation.  They present it as a satisfying hypothesis whose value derives from its capacity to account for the facts—or as a postulate that is necessary for any psychology to be established.  They accept that an immediate consciousness of freedom exists, which their opponents—who refer to it as the “proof based on the intuition of inner sense”—use against them.  Only they make the debate turn on the value of this internal revelation.  In this way, nobody disputes the intuition through which we apprehend ourselves as the first cause of our states and of our acts.  The fact remains that any one of us is capable of trying to mediate anguish by raising himself above it and judging it as an illusion deriving from our ignorance of the real causes of our acts.  The problem which arises in this case is the strength of our belief in this mediation.  Does the act of judging our anguish disarm it? Clearly not.  However, at this point a new phenomenon comes into being, a process of distraction in relation to anguish that presupposes within it, once again, a power of nihilation.  Since it is only a postulate or hypothesis, determinism alone cannot be the foundation for this distraction.  It is a more concrete endeavor at flight, operating within reflection’s own domain.  It is in the first place an attempt to distract myself from the possibles that are contrary to my possible.  When I constitute myself as understanding a possible as my possible, I must of course acknowledge its existence at the other end of my project and grasp it as myself, over there, awaiting me in the future, and separated from me by a nothingness.  In this sense I apprehend myself as the first origin of my possible, and this is what we ordinarily mean by the “consciousness of freedom”: it is this structure of consciousness, and it alone, that the advocates of free will have in mind when they talk about “the intuition of inner sense.” But it may happen that I try at the same time to distract myself from the constitution of other possibles that contradict my possible.  It is true that I cannot avoid positing their existence in the same movement that generates the chosen possible as mine; I cannot stop myself from constituting them as living possibles, i.e., as possibles that may possibly become mine .  But I try to see them as if they possessed a transcendent and purely logical being—in short, as if they were things.  If, from the standpoint of reflection, I consider the possibility of writing this book as my possibility, I conjure up—between this possibility and my consciousness—a nothingness of being that constitutes it as a possibility, and which I grasp, precisely, alongside the constant possibility that the possibility of not writing it is my possibility.  But I try to behave in relation to this possibility of not writing it as if it were an observable object, and I immerse myself in what I wish to see there: I try to view it as something that only needs to be noted in passing, that does not concern me.  It needs to be an external possibility in relation to me, like movement in relation to that motionless ball.  If I managed to do that, the possibles conflicting with my possible, constituted as logical entities, would lose their power: they would no longer threaten me because they would be outside , because they would surround my possible as if they were purely conceivable eventualities—which basically means conceivable by someone else, or as the possibles of someone else who was in the same situation .  They belong to the objective situation in the manner of a transcendent structure, or—put differently, and in Heideggerean terminology—I myself will write this book but “ they ” may also not write it.  53 By these means I may hide from myself that these possibles are myself and immanent conditions of my possible’s possibility.  They will retain just enough being to preserve the gratuitous character of my possible—as the free possibility of a free being—but they have been stripped of their menacing character: they are of no interest to me , and the chosen possible appears, owing to its being chosen, as my only concrete possible.  In consequence, the nothingness that separates me from that possible—and that, precisely, bestows upon it its possibility—will be filled in.  But my flight from anguish is not just an attempt at distraction from the future: it seeks at the same time to disarm the threat posed by the past.  What I am trying to flee from here is my transcendence itself, insofar as it maintains and surpasses my essence.  I claim that I am my essence, in the mode of being of the in-itself.  At the same time, however, I refuse to regard this essence itself as historically constituted and, therefore, as entailing my action in just the way in which a circle entails its properties.  I consider it—or at least I try to consider it—as the first beginning of my possible and I adamantly deny that it has any beginning in itself; I claim, therefore, that an act is free when it exactly reflects my essence.  But in addition I try to relocate this freedom—which would worry me if it was a freedom confronting my Self 54 —inside my essence, i.e., inside my Self.  It is a matter of imagining my Self as a small God inhabiting me and possessing my freedom as a metaphysical property.  It is no longer my being that is free, insofar as it is; instead, what is free—at the heart of my consciousness—is my Self.  This fiction is profoundly reassuring insofar as it pushes freedom into the depths of an opaque being: it is to the extent that my essence is not translucent, that it is something transcendent within immanence, that my freedom can become one of its properties.  In brief, it is a matter of grasping my freedom within my Self as if it were the Other ’s freedom.  55 We can see the basic themes of this fiction: my Self becomes the origin of my acts in the way that someone else is the origin of his acts, and as an already constituted person.  Of course, my Self lives and changes, and we can even concede that each of its acts plays a role in changing it.  But these harmonious and continuous changes are conceived of biologically.  They resemble the changes I may observe in Pierre, my friend, when I see him again after a separation.  Bergson explicitly met these reassuring requirements when he devised his theory of the “deep-seated Self,” structuring itself and enduring through time, a Self that is the constant contemporary of—and cannot be surpassed by—my consciousness, lying at the origin of our acts, not as a cataclysmic power but in the manner of a father begetting his children, so that the act, without flowing from the essence as its strict consequence, and without even being predictable, maintains a reassuring relation with it, a family resemblance.  Although the act moves beyond the essence, it moves along the same track; of course, it retains an element of irreducibility, but we can recognize ourselves in it and learn about ourselves, as a father can recognize and learn about himself in the son who continues his work.  56 Thus, by projecting freedom—which we grasp within ourselves—into a psychological object, the Self, Bergson helped to conceal our anguish, but at the expense of consciousness itself.  In this way, what he constituted and described was not our freedom as it appears to itself: it is the Other’s freedom .  Here, therefore, is the set of processes through which we try to hide our freedom from ourselves: in grasping our possible, we avoid thinking about other possibles and we turn these into possibles belonging to some undifferentiated Other.  We do not want to see our possible as maintained in being by a pure nihilating freedom; instead, we try to apprehend it as if it were generated by an already constituted object, which is nothing other than our Self, imagined and described as the Other’s person .  57 We would like to hold on to the independence and responsibility conveyed by the earlier intuition but we are concerned to minimize anything it contains to do with original nihilation and we are prepared, moreover, to take refuge in a belief in determinism at any point if this freedom weighs on us, and if we need an excuse.  Thus we flee from anguish by trying to grasp ourselves from outside as an Other or as a thing .  There is nothing original about what we are accustomed to call “the revelation of inner sense” or “primary intuition” of our freedom: it is a process that is already constructed, with the clear intention of concealing our anguish, the genuine “immediate datum” of our freedom, from ourselves.  58 Do we succeed, through these various constructions, in stifling or disguising our anguish? It is clear that we cannot eliminate it, since anguish is what we are .  As for “masking it,” apart from the fact that the very nature of consciousness and its translucency forbid us from taking this idea literally, we should note the particular type of behavior this phrase denotes: we can mask an external object because it exists independently of us; for the same reason we can divert our gaze or our attention away from it—that is, by focusing our eyes, quite simply, on some other object.  At that point each reality involved—mine, and the object’s—resumes its own life, and the accidental relation joining my consciousness to the thing disappears, without thereby changing either existence.  But if I am the thing I want to mask, the question takes on an entirely different dimension: I cannot in effect will “not to see” some particular aspect of my being if I am fully aware of exactly the aspect that I want not to see.  In other words, I am obliged to indicate it in my being, in order to be capable of turning away from it; better still, I am obliged constantly to think about it, in order to make sure I am not thinking about it.  We must take this to mean not only that I must—necessarily—constantly carry along with me what I wish to flee from but also that I have to aim at the object I am fleeing from in order to flee it; in other words, my anguish, my intentional aiming at anguish, and my flight from anguish toward reassuring myths must be given within the unity of a single consciousness.  In brief, I flee in order not to know, but I cannot be unaware that I am fleeing, and a flight from anguish is just one way of becoming conscious of anguish.  Thus, strictly speaking, it cannot be either masked or avoided.  However, we cannot say that to flee from anguish and to be my anguish are quite the same thing: if I can be my anguish in order to flee from it, we have to presuppose an ability to decenter myself in relation to what I am, and to be anguish in the form of “not being it,” and to make use of a nihilating power within anguish itself.  This nihilating power nihilates anguish as I flee from it, and annihilates itself insofar as I am it in order to flee it .  This is what we call bad faith .  We are not, therefore, chasing our anguish out of consciousness, or constituting it as an unconscious psychological phenomenon; rather, I can—quite simply—adopt bad faith to grasp the anguish that I am, and this bad faith, whose purpose is to fill in the nothingness that I am in my relationship to myself, implies precisely the nothingness it eliminates.  Here we reach the conclusion of our initial description.  Our examination of negation cannot take us any further.  It has revealed the existence of a particular type of behavior—behavior in the face of non-being—that presupposes a special transcendence, requiring separate investigation.  We find ourselves, therefore, in the presence of two human ecstases: the ecstasis through which we are thrown into being-in-itself, and the ecstasis that engages us in non-being.  59 Our initial problem, which was simply that of man’s relations to being, seems in consequence to have become considerably more complicated; on the other hand, it is not impossible that, by pushing our analysis of transcendence toward non-being to its limit, we might obtain valuable information for our understanding of any transcendence.  And furthermore, we cannot exclude the problem of nothingness from our inquiry: if, in confronting the in-itself, man behaves —and our philosophical questioning is a type of such behavior—it is because man is not that being.  Therefore we return to non-being as a condition of our transcendence toward being.  We need therefore to keep hold of the problem of nothingness, and not to let go of it before its elucidation is complete.  But we have learned all that we can from our examination of questioning and of negation.  It has led us to empirical freedom, as man’s nihilation within temporality and as the necessary condition of our transcendent apprehension of negatities.  This empirical freedom itself remains in need of foundation.  It cannot be the first nihilation and the foundation of nihilation in general.  It does play a role in constituting, within immanence, transcendent items that condition all negative transcendents.  But the very fact that these transcendents of empirical freedom are constituted as transcendent within immanence shows us that these nihilations must be secondary, and presuppose the existence of an original nothingness: they are only one stage within the analytic regression that leads us from our transcendent “ negatities ” right up to the being that is its own nothingness.  Obviously we must locate the foundation of all negation in a nihilation practiced in the midst of immanence ; it is in absolute immanence, in the pure subjectivity of the instantaneous cogito , that we may uncover the original act through which man is his own nothingness in relation to himself.  What must consciousness be in its being, in order for man to arise within the world in it, and on its basis, as the being that is its own nothingness, and through whom nothingness arrives in the world? At this point we seem to lack the instrument we need in order to resolve this new problem: negation only directly engages with freedom.  We need to find, within freedom itself, a way of behaving that will enable us to progress further.  But we have already met this way of behaving—which can lead us right up to the threshold of immanence while remaining sufficiently objective to allow us to objectively derive its conditions of possibility.  Didn’t we point out, a short while ago, that in bad faith we are -anguish- in-order-to-flee -it, within the unity of a single consciousness? If bad faith is to be possible, therefore, it must be possible for us to encounter within the same consciousness the unity of being and not being, a being-in-order-not-to-be.  The next focus of our questioning, therefore, must be bad faith.  To be able to question anything, man must be able to be his own nothingness, which means he can be at the origin of non-being within being only if his own being is shot through, in itself and by itself, by nothingness: in this way the transcendences of the past and the future appear within the temporal being of human-reality.  But bad faith is instantaneous.  What, then, must consciousness be, in the instantaneity of the prereflective cogito , for man to be capable of bad faith? Notes on the Translation N OTES ON THE T RANSLATION Sarah Richmond Frederick Olafson, an American philosopher, reviewed Barnes’s translation of BN in 1958.  He was unsympathetic to its content and also commented harshly on its style: The French text presents, notoriously, a thankless task; it is endlessly repetitive, full of ugly neologisms, and in places quite unintelligible.  Inevitably , the English version shares these defects to a degree and readers are not likely to find it much easier going than the original.  (Olafson 1958: 276, my emphasis) When readers of this translation encounter stylistic infelicities, repetitions, and ramblings, I hope they will bear Olafson’s sentences in mind.  It is common for translators to dissociate themselves from the content of their translated text, but the despair I have sometimes felt has usually been in connection with BN’s style.  Where they seem legitimate, I have taken steps (detailed below) to mitigate stylistic defects, but in this respect the options available to a responsible translator are limited.  Punctuation is the main area where I have felt licensed to depart from Sartre’s practice in order to make the text more readable.  Written French often contains long sentences with multiple subordinate clauses that are often punctuated only by commas.  Sartre uses such sentences throughout the text.  Good English prose usually works differently: sentences tend to be shorter, and parentheses, colons, and semicolons (as well as commas) are used to order the meaning.  It seems appropriate for a translator to take advantage, where she can, of these differences.  In making some of Sartre’s sentences shorter (by dividing one French sentence into two or more English ones) and/or punctuating them differently (with more semicolons and colons, and fewer commas), I do not think I have been unfaithful.  In the same vein, I have not translated all the numerous instances of en effet (“indeed” or “in effect”); in the French, this phrase is often used more for emphasis than to add information, so where it seems unnecessary in the English, I have sometimes deleted it.  Another phrase Sartre uses frequently is c’est-à-dire , which translates literally as “that is to say”; because it would badly clutter the English text if I translated each instance like that, I have often used the near-synonymous “i.e.” instead.  As the rules for the use of quotation marks also differ between French and English (e.g., within dialogue, or to show that words are “mentioned” rather than “used”), I have also taken advantage of this difference and introduced quotation marks where that improves clarity.  Sartre likes to hyphenate phrases: it seems likely he got this habit from Heidegger.  I have not felt entitled to interfere with this practice, despite the many cumbersome word strings that ensue: presumably (as in Heidegger’s “Being-in-the-world”) the hyphens are intended, at least in most instances, to emphasize the indissolubility of the terms they conjoin.  This is true, for example, of réalité-humaine , which I translate as “human-reality.” In other instances, the purpose of the hyphen is unclear.  I have no idea why Sartre hyphenates “peopled-world” ( monde-peuplé ) at EN 601 or “human-will” ( volonté-humaine ) at EN 486.  Sartre is also inconsistent in his use of hyphens, using the same phrase at different points in the text with or without them: although this is puzzling, I have not interfered.  With some hyphenated phrases Sartre switches with apparent arbitrariness between one word order and its reverse, as, for example, in “Other-object” at EN 266 and “object-Other” at EN 296 ( objet-autrui and autrui-objet respectively).  I sometimes switch the order of the hyphenated words in translation: French and English follow different rules with respect to word order anyway, but there are also instances where I have switched the word order in the English, not because it is grammatically required but for the sake of a more euphonious phrase.  What are the main differences between Barnes’s older translation and mine? Barnes’s achievement was immense, especially when one bears in mind the limited technology at her disposal (no computers, Internet, etc.), and her translation of BN is far better than many other first English translations of French philosophical texts from the same period.  Although some of Barnes’s decisions were flawed, and she made a number of outright mistakes, these shortcomings alone might not warrant a new translation.  Fortunately, and in part because of advances in technology and professional standards as well as the availability of recent philosophical scholarship and translations, I have also been able to enhance the text in a number of ways that I hope readers will find helpful.  Many of the writings to which Sartre refers—either directly or more allusively—were unavailable in English translation in the 1950s.  To give just one example, Heidegger’s Being and Time was first translated into English by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson in 1962.  This careful, thoroughly annotated translation has enabled me to find the source of many of Sartre’s numerous Heidegger references in the published English version and to quote, or discuss, or direct the reader to the corresponding passages.  In the same way, of course, I have been able to benefit from other reliable translations of other philosophical works, in particular those by Husserl and Hegel.  These English translations, in conjunction with additional critical discussion by anglophone scholars, have resulted in the existence of various “lexicons” associated with different European philosophers; this has allowed me, in some cases, to translate a French term into an English term from the relevant lexicon, and thus to maintain cross-textual consistency.  In some instances this works well: I have followed most English translations of Bergson, for example, in rendering élan as “impulse” rather than the alternative terms offered by French–English dictionaries (e.g., “momentum”).  But this accumulated history also creates complicated situations in which some advantages have to be sacrificed for others.  Sartre’s negative vocabulary offers an illustration: Sartre would have found the term le néant in Corbin’s translation of Heidegger’s “What Is Metaphysics?” where Corbin uses it to translate the German das Nichts (Heidegger 1938).  Sartre was also familiar with Bergson’s rejection of the idea of le néant in L’Évolution Créatrice (translated as Bergson 1911).  Many English translations of Heidegger render das Nichts as “the Nothing,” while Bergson’s term le néant was for a long time rendered as “the Nought.” Three different terms, then, are in circulation in English: nothingness, nothing, and the nought.  Further complications arise when one tries to reproduce in English the connections between the words in this negative vocabulary.  The intended assonance of Heidegger’s controversial sentence Das Nichts nichtet has been reproduced, in a translation suggested by some Heidegger scholars, as “The nothing noths” (Inwood 1999).  Sartre built a parallel assonance into his French text by inventing the verb néantiser .  To reproduce this assonance in English, one could either translate néantiser by borrowing the verb “to noth” from Heidegger or make up a new verb along the same lines: “to nothingize,” perhaps? However, néantir also closely resembles the existing French verb anéantir (“to annihilate”), and this connection speaks in favor of translating it into English as “nihilate.” This was Barnes’s solution, and after some reflection I have endorsed it.  The widespread use of Barnes’s translation has of course “naturalized” some of her vocabulary, and where I disagree with her decision about a significant term, I have had to consider the cost to (some) readers of introducing a change.  For example, Sartre frequently uses the noun surgissement and the related verb surgir to characterize the way the for-itself arises within the world.  Surgir is not an unusual verb in everyday French, where it simply means “to arise,” with an implication of abruptness that sometimes speaks in favor of a phrase such as “to suddenly appear” or “to crop up.” The related noun is harder to translate: one option might be “sudden appearance,” but that would blur the boundaries of the term “appearance” in BN, which is better confined, in my view, to instances where Sartre uses apparence or apparition (often with a phenomenological sense).  The difficulties are clear; nonetheless, I think Barnes’s choice of the term “upsurge” was eccentric.  “Upsurge” is rarely used in English, and the first entry for it in most dictionaries defines it as an increase of something in its size or incidence: the word can be used, for example, in a phrase such as “a recent upsurge of crime.” (Less commonly, the verb can be used intransitively to mean “to surge up,” as in “the water upsurged”: perhaps Barnes had this usage in mind.) I have decided to use the verb “to arise” instead and (where necessary) the noun “arising,” as these are more faithful to the register used in the French.  The case for conservatism in relation to existing translations is sometimes strengthened by the weight of published commentary elsewhere: even if I could think of an accurate way of translating réalité-humaine that did less violence to Heidegger’s term Dasein , the “Humanism Debate” (discussed in my Introduction) has now made Sartre’s and Corbin’s decision into a significant event in the French reception of Heidegger.  To reverse that decision would be rather like rewriting history, and in any case it is not the role of a translator to “correct” the author of her text.  Because many of the people to whom Sartre refers have since faded into obscurity, I have provided many identifying footnotes.  In addition, where Sartre refers to passages or arguments in works by other philosophers, I have tried to reference these for the reader.  Note that I have not provided explanatory footnotes for obvious names (e.g., Plato).  In the remainder of these notes I list some further elements of my translation, either to explain my decision or to provide further information, or both.  I start with “parts of speech” and move on to various clusters of vocabulary.  Prepositions Sartre frequently uses prepositions as if they were nouns (especially l’audelà and dehors ).  I have often put quotation marks round the English equivalents, for example “the unconditioned ‘beyond’ ” (EN 129) or “purely as an ‘outside’ ” (EN 517), to make the grammatical structure clearer than it would otherwise be in English.  Pronouns Il, elle, c’est : Several translation difficulties arise from the differences between the French and English pronoun systems.  The following sets out my policy in relation to the main difficulties.  Often, once Sartre has used some noun in a sentence, he refers back to it with il or elle , where the gender of the pronoun in French helps the reader track the referent.  (For example, having mentioned une table , Sartre may refer back to it with elle .) In these cases the English may be less clear, as the gender-neutral “it” may have more than one referent.  To maintain clarity, I have sometimes repeated the noun in such cases.  Sartre’s two modes of being— pour-soi and en-soi —are naturally translated as “for-itself” and “in-itself”; a consistent description of the for-itself’s doings will therefore refer to it with the impersonal pronoun, “ it .” It needs to be remembered, however, that the for-itself is the mode of being of human consciousness, so it is exemplified by persons .  In consequence, there are some contexts where the decision to translate with the pronoun “it” (rather than the personal pronouns “he” or “she”) will cause strain.  Where the phrase pour-soi is followed in close proximity by some characterization of an activity or attitude that clearly belongs to a person, I have therefore often switched (sometimes within the same sentence) from “itself” to “himself.” For example, at EN 450 I have: “It may happen that the for-itself, having experienced these various avatars in the course of its historialization, decides—in full knowledge of the futility of his previous attempts—to pursue the other’s death.” Similarly, I have avoided using the pronoun “it” for the Other.  At EN 281, for example, I translate Sartre’s autrui n’est pas pour soi comme il m’apparaît as “the Other is not for himself as he appears to me.” For greater clarity of reference, I also sometimes repeat the phrase “for-itself” within a sentence or paragraph.  Soi : Sartre sometimes uses this term (e.g., in the phrase pour-soi ) such that it corresponds to the reflexive pronoun “itself” in English; at other times it is used as a noun to mean the self, or Ego.  (Sartre also uses le moi in this sense: in some cases I signal whether the French has moi or soi by putting the French pronoun in square brackets in the text.) Sartre also uses the noun soi to refer to the unattainable self-coincidence that haunts the for-itself (e.g., at EN 126).  Here, I have translated it as “the itself,” sometimes putting “itself” within scare quotes to acknowledge the grammatical oddity.  One advantage of “itself” is that it maintains the connection with the “for-itself” whose ideal it is; it also makes it clear that Sartre is not concerned in these instances with the kind of “self” possessed by persons but rather with self-coincidence.  For conscience (de) soi , see “Other words worthy of note” below.  Il : In line with French linguistic convention, Sartre often uses this masculine pronoun “universally” to refer to a man or a woman, and (similarly) he uses l’homme to mean “man” in the general sense, i.e., humanity (male and female) in general.  Of course, the corresponding terms can also be used like this in English.  In both France and England, this practice has in recent decades been criticized for its implicit sexism, and many writers now use a more egalitarian alternative (e.g., “he or she,” “they,” etc.).  In relation to this political issue, it would clearly be an anachronistic imposition to alter Sartre’s traditional use of the masculine pronoun ( il ); similarly, where he writes in the first-personal voice I have assumed that voice is male.  In addition, once the topic of the Other is introduced (in Part Three), I have followed Sartre in referring to the Other as a “he.” Nonetheless, there are some contexts where, in my view, it is important to use female pronouns, as I explain in the next paragraph.  Gender pronouns in the context of interpersonal relations In the sections in Part Three in which Sartre discusses love and sexual desire, the translation of the masculine pronoun il becomes particularly challenging.  There is good reason to suppose that in Sartre’s analysis of these relations he has a male-female (heterosexual) couple in mind.  Sartre sometimes provides examples that make this explicit, and in any case any other supposition would have been unusual in the 1940s.  (In addition, Sartre sometimes manifests—in BN and in other writings—the prejudiced attitudes of his time toward homosexuality.) Despite this implicit heterosexual assumption, Sartre continues to refer frequently, as French allows him to, to both members of the loving or sexual couple with the male pronoun.  Thus, in speaking of the lover and his beloved, Sartre regularly refers to them as l’amant and l’aimé (not in the feminine form aimée ) and uses the masculine pronoun il for each of them.  Now, in French this usage is consistent with the belief that one member of the couple is female—the “universality” of il is sufficiently robust to allow that.  But in English, if both members of a couple are referred to by “he,” most people would conclude that they are both male (and, perhaps, that they are homosexual).  For this reason, in sections I and II of Part Three, Chapter 3, I have often indicated that one partner in a couple is female by using the pronoun “she,” even where this means translating Sartre’s il as “she.” Note that my motive here is not political but to replicate in English the scenario I think Sartre has in mind.  If it has the effect of increasing one’s sense of female presence within the text, that is a happy but coincidental consequence.  (From a political perspective, of course, the heteronormativity of the scenario may be regrettable.) 1 In section III of the same chapter Sartre discusses groupings  nous : here the relevant pronouns are “we” or “us.” At this point I revert to using “he” throughout, as it is not clear that females are involved.  Neologisms and ungrammatical locutions (NB: Although some of these words discussed here are now included in some French dictionaries, the earliest use given is most often Sartre’s.) chosifier, chosiste : Sartre invents this verb (and the corresponding adjective), using it to mean “to make into a thing  une chose .” As “thingify” is cumbersome in English and Sartre’s verb is synonymous with the fairly ordinary English verb “to reify,” I have often preferred the latter over the former.  Where the idea of “thing” seems important, I signal it.  est été : In this ungrammatical locution, Sartre tampers with the correct way of saying that something “has been” in French (i.e., to use the verb avoir followed by été, the past participle of être ), by replacing the main verb avoir by être .  This generates a grammatically incorrect phrase equivalent to the English “is been.” For example, at EN 57, Sartre writes le néant “est été , ” using scare quotes to acknowledge the oddness of the phrase.  (Sartre also offers some reasons for using it in the same paragraph.) I cannot see any reason not to translate it literally, rendering the quoted phrase as “nothingness ‘is been.’ ” négatité is a noun coined by Sartre to refer to a particular instance of nothingness within the world.  I do not think it is necessary to leave it in French (as Barnes did), when a mirror neologism—“negatity” (pl.  “negatities”) can be used.  objectité can straightforwardly be translated as “objecthood.” Vocabulary relating to the mind: psychology, motivation, experience, perception There is a cluster of issues that are worth noting in relation to the concept of the “mind” (or, as Sartre puts it, le psyche ).  From his earliest philosophical writing, Sartre engages in a polemical debate with empirical (or, as he often calls it, “positivist”) psychology.  In BN he regards it as a source of grave ontological misunderstanding and rejects a range of psychological commonplaces, including the existence of mental states, the passivity of the emotions, and the alleged differences between acts of “passion” and of reason.  (Although Sartre often directs these arguments against psychologists, he also finds similar targets elsewhere; for example, he rejects Bergson’s conception of the “deep-seated self” as well as Proust’s analysis of jealousy.) Sartre’s account of our experience of the Other is also revisionary and also brought into line with his account of its ontological structure.  He often describes our relations with the Other in negative and conflictual terms, as his discussion of shame shows.  This is one reason for bringing out the negative connotation of the noun épreuve (discussed below).  Sartre rejects an account of motivation that was prominent in France in the first half of the twentieth century and often used by historians and biographers.  The pair of terms mobiles and motifs (see below for discussion of their translation) is central to this account.  Sartre’s attitude to the Gestalt theory of perception was more positive, and he relies on it at several points in BN.  This theory was developed by the Czech psychologist Max Wertheimer (1880–1943) and others, and influenced many twentieth-century European thinkers.  The German noun Gestalt translates as “form”: accordingly, Gestalt theory emphasizes the role of structure within the perceptual field as a determinant of perception.  The organization of the perceptual field allows a specific “figure” to emerge against a “ground”; the same field, differently organized, may yield a different perception.  (As these are the terms used in English translations of Gestalt theory, I use them to translate Sartre’s forme and fond .) In anglophone philosophy, the duck-rabbit discussed by Wittgenstein is one of the best-known Gestalt examples.  Sartre also borrows the adjective “hodological” from the psychologist Kurt Lewin (1890–1947), who was also associated with the Gestalt school.  The Greek hodos means “path”; “hodological” space is therefore the space that we inhabit—lived space—in which our “pathways” are more or less difficult, according to our projects.  angoisse : I translate this as “anguish.” Sartre inherits this word (via Corbin’s translation) from Heidegger’s Angst , which is usually translated into English as “anxiety.” The term “anxiety” is also often used in English translation and discussion of Kierkegaard’s philosophy, and within a broader theological tradition with which Heidegger engaged.  These considerations weigh in favor of translating angoisse as “anxiety” (and this is compatible with the range of dictionary suggestions).  On the other hand “anxiety” has a more medical sound in English, whereas “anguish” sounds more literary and, therefore, more Sartrean.  In addition, several French dictionaries suggest that angoisse is a more severe form of affliction.  épreuve, éprouver : Sartre often uses the noun épreuve to characterize my experience of the Other (e.g., EN 403: je suis épreuve d’autrui ).  A choice has to be made between the many possible ways of translating this French term, which belongs to several semantic fields.  It can mean “trial,” as in a scientific trial or test, or an academic test, or the activity through which one “tries out” a horse or a car.  It can also refer to the kind of challenge one might set someone—e.g., Hercules—to test their strength or courage.  It can also mean “ordeal” or “hardship.” At its most neutral, it might simply be translated as “experience.” Because Sartre frequently emphasizes the asymmetrical and threatening aspects of our relation with the Other, I frequently translate épreuve into verbs that hint at these aspects (e.g., “I undergo the Other”); where a noun seems unavoidable, I sometimes use “ordeal.” Where Sartre uses éprouver with a more neutral sense, I translate it as “to experience.” mobile(s) and motif(s) : Sartre sometimes uses the word mobile on its own; here it is unproblematically translated as “motive.” Elsewhere, in the course of more extended discussions of motivation, Sartre uses the pair of terms mobile(s) and motif(s) , invoking a terminology that was familiar in French academic discourse in the twentieth century.  The two terms are counterparts insofar as mobile refers to “subjective” (e.g., psychological) motivational forces, while motif refers to “objective” factors, i.e., grounds or reasons for action.  Sartre discusses this familiar explanatory apparatus at length in Part Four.  I translate mobile as “motive” and motif as “reason.” Barnes translated motif as “cause”; although she must have meant “cause” in the sense of “ground” (as in “cause for complaint”), this policy is potentially confusing, given Sartre’s categorical denial of any causal relations within consciousness.  psyche, psychique : Sartre uses the term psyche to refer to the object studied by psychologists and presented to first-person reflection (EN 198): i.e., the “mind.” This can usually be easily translated as the English equivalent “psyche.” The corresponding adjective—“psychic”—is also available in English, but it is not ordinarily used in the way in which Sartre typically uses psychique , i.e., to mean “psychological” or “mental.” If I were to use the word “psychic” in these contexts, the English would seem outlandish, and it might be difficult to keep the idea of paranormal (e.g., telepathic) phenomena at bay.  In most instances, therefore, I translate psychique as “psychological.” Religious vocabulary Given Sartre’s atheism, the abundant use of religious vocabulary in BN may surprise some readers.  However, for Sartre the concept of God is philosophically necessary, even if He does not exist.  For helpful discussion of the relationship between theology and Sartre’s philosophy, see Kirkpatrick (2017).  Apart from ens causa sui (discussed immediately below), the religious vocabulary does not cause difficulties in translation; the main purpose of this note is to draw it to the reader’s attention.  In some cases there is more room for doubt about whether a religious allusion is intended than in others.  Examples of terms that (probably) import a religious allusion include “incarnation,” “deliverance,” “salvation,” “emanation,” “grace,” and “passion.” ens causa sui : Sartre frequently uses this phrase, both in its original Latin, and translated into French as cause de soi .  The reference of course is to God, or the Supreme Being, i.e., a being whose existence does not depend (causally or in any other way) on any other being.  I have translated it as “the being that is its own cause” or, occasionally, “the self-caused.” Vocabulary from the three Hs General note: Where Sartre uses a term in the German (sometimes without any translation), I usually explain it in a footnote on the same page.  The following notes explain how the French terms that Sartre takes from (translations of) these German philosophers correlate with those used by English translators and scholars.  In many cases I also provide the original German term and offer a brief explanation of its meaning.  Hegel vocabulary Sartre’s footnote to EN 42 mentions a collection of extracts from Hegel’s writing in French translation edited by Henri Lefebvre and published under the title Morceaux Choisis in 1938 (available in French as Hegel 1995).  It turns out that Sartre took virtually every Hegel quotation he uses in BN from this anthology.  In providing the sources of these quotations, Sartre follows Lefebvre in distinguishing (as is also customary in English) between Hegel’s “lesser” ( Petite ) Logic and his “greater” ( Grande ) Logic .  These are nicknames for Hegel’s Encyclopaedia Logic and Science of Logic , respectively.  dépasser : In everyday French, this verb means “to go beyond,” or “to overtake.” However, it is also used in many French translations of Hegel to translate Hegel’s German term Aufhebung , which is often translated into English as “to sublate.” For this reason, where the context is clearly Hegelian, I use “to sublate.” poser : This verb is used by French translators of Hegel to render his verb Setzen (which many other German philosophers, including Husserl, also use).  I follow most other translators by rendering it as “to posit.” Sartre sometimes uses the noun position to mean the act of positing; here I translate it as “positing.” Unlike “posit” in English, poser is also used in ordinary French, where it can mean “to put down” or “to pose” (e.g., a question).  In these nontechnical contexts I have used everyday English vocabulary.  scission, scissiparité : The word “scission” also exists in English, although it is not commonly used: it means “split” or “division.” French translators of Hegel use scission frequently to translate the German Entzweiung ; English translations of Hegel sometimes use “sundering” or “division” for the corresponding term.  I have stuck to “scission.” Sartre appears to use the noun scissiparité interchangeably with scission : as “scissiparity” also exists in English, I have used it, mirroring Sartre’s oscillation between the two terms.  Husserl vocabulary As I have mentioned in my Introduction, Sartre discovered Husserl’s work in the 1930s; he had read several of Husserl’s texts in their original German before he wrote BN, as well as Emmanuel Levinas’s early book on Husserl (translated into English as Levinas 1995).  Readers should note that the correct interpretation of many of Husserl’s concepts is contested (and there are questions about consistency across texts): the notes below provide no more than a rough idea.  Husserl’s key methodological concept is the “phenomenological reduction.” Sartre also sometimes refers to it with the Greek term ἐποχή (transliterated epoché ), which Husserl also used.  The basic idea is that, by effecting the phenomenological reduction, the philosophizing subject suspends or parenthesizes the “natural attitude” of everyday life, and reflects from the first personal point of view on the way the world appears (i.e., in phenomena ) to consciousness.  All presuppositions concerning the existence or nonexistence of the things that appear are bracketed in this reflective exercise, which is supposed to deliver presuppositionless knowledge.  apprésenter : Husserl uses this verb for intentional objects that are mediately (i.e., indirectly) given to the subject.  A central example would be other people’s consciousness, which, for Husserl, is appresented in their bodies.  I follow Husserl’s English translators in rendering this verb as “to appresent.” en personne : Sartre sometimes uses this phrase, or “ présence en personne ,” in scare quotes, perhaps to indicate its Husserlian origins.  Husserl uses it to describe the direct way in which objects are given when they are actually there, as for example in ordinary sensory perception.  “The spatial physical thing which we see is, with all its transcendence, still something perceived, given ‘in person’ in the manner peculiar to consciousness” (Husserl 1983: §43).  I translate it as “in person.” hyle : Husserl borrows this term from the Greek word hyle for “matter.” In Husserl’s phenomenology the hyle in a mental act is its sensory matter, the brute “given.” intentionner : French translators use this verb to render Husserl’s verb meinen , which is usually translated into English as “to intend,” in the sense where this means the relation of consciousness to its (intentional) object.  Sartre may have come across this verb in Levinas’s writing on Husserl.  I translate it as “to intend.” irréel : In ordinary usage, this French word can simply mean “unreal,” but it is also used in philosophical contexts to translate Husserl’s German adjective irreal .  For this reason, if the context suggests that Sartre is using technical phenomenological vocabulary, I follow English translations of Husserl by using “irreal” for irréel (even though, of course, that is not an ordinary English word).  In Husserl’s phenomenology the term “irreal” is used to describe facts or objects (e.g., essences) that do not have spatial or temporal locations, as well as imagined objects.  nécessité de fait : Sartre uses this phrase frequently and tells us (at EN 21) that he borrows it from Husserl, who uses it to characterize consciousness.  Husserl’s point is that, although consciousness does not have any necessary existence, once it does exist, the non-being of its moments is inconceivable.  Husserl scholars variously translate the phrase into English as “necessity of a fact,” “factual necessity” and “ de facto necessity.” I use “factual necessity.” noème, noèse : In translations of Husserl, these French terms correspond to “noema” and “noesis” in English.  (Husserl borrows the words from ancient Greek, where noema means “thought,” “perception” or “idea.”) The noema is, roughly, the content of a mental act, i.e., the way its referent is presented; the noesis is the correlative subjective process, for example the thinking of the thought or the perceiving of the perception.  objectivant, objectiver : The French adjective corresponds to Husserl’s term objektivierend ; in Husserl, it describes a basic feature of all mental acts, i.e., their having an object.  English translations of Husserl render it as either “objectivating” or “objectifying.” I use the latter, and I translate objectiver as “to objectify” throughout.  passéifier : Some dictionaries suggest that Sartre may have made this verb up.  In any case he uses it to mean “to make/render past” and, while I have not been able to match it with Husserlian terminology, I would guess that he borrows the concept from Husserl.  I translate it as my own neologistic verb “to pastify,” although where that is ungainly I have sometimes translated it instead as “to make/render past.” poser : See entry above, in “Hegel vocabulary.” présentifier : French translators use this verb to translate Husserl’s vergegenwärtigen .  I have followed most English translators in using the neologistic verb “to presentify.” Husserl uses this term to describe a way in which objects may be somehow “made present” to consciousness even though they are not perceptually given.  For example, anticipation “presentifies” an object insofar as its presence is not thought to be actual but at some future date; recollection does the same thing but represents the object as having been in the past; another form of presentification is imagination, etc.  protension : French translators use this noun to translate Husserl’s German noun Protention .  I follow Husserl’s English translators in rendering it as “protention.” According to Husserl’s account of temporal experience, protentions and retentions are counterpart non-independent elements of any conscious experience.  Protentions “reach” forward, into the future, while retentions reach back into the immediate past.  remplir, remplissement : These terms correspond to Husserl’s German erfüllen and Erfüllung ; the usual English translations are “to fulfill” and “fulfillment.” For Husserl, an act is “fulfilled” when evidence shows it to be as the subject took it to be.  In the case of perception, for example, an intuition of a landscape is “fulfilled” by the sensory determinations that present it, as Husserl puts it, as being “there,” “in person.” Where an object is absent, a subject might intend it “emptily,” i.e., without sensory fulfillment.  (Thus I use “emptily” to render Sartre’s adverbial phrase à vide .) rétention : I translate this as “retention.” See protension above for explanation.  thèse, thétique : A “thetic” act, for Husserl, is one that sets something forth, or posits it.  For example, the object of a “doxic thesis” will be posited in some modality of belief.  Heidegger vocabulary The reader should bear in mind that, as discussed earlier, Sartre’s access to Heidegger is often mediated by Henry Corbin’s French translations (Heidegger 1938), as well as by French commentaries, such as Alphonse De Waelhens’s La Philosophie de Martin Heidegger (De Waelhens 1942) (where Sartre found the passage from Heidegger that he quotes in a footnote to EN 413).  dépasser : This verb is used in French translations of Heidegger as well as in translations of Hegel, although, confusingly, it does not usually render the same original German verb(s).  In Heidegger’s case, dépasser sometimes translates the German verb übersteigen (for which it is a good match, as both these verbs can simply mean “to go beyond” in ordinary language).  English translations of Heidegger often use “to surpass” in these contexts.  Apart from Heideggerean contexts, Sartre frequently uses the verb dépasser in BN on his own account to characterize the relation of the for-itself to the objects in the world that it “goes beyond” in the pursuit of its ends (e.g., EN 638: lorsque je dépasse mes objets vers un but ).  Here I use the verb “to surpass,” which avoids cumbersome prepositions and also harmonizes with the precedent set by Heidegger, which influences Sartre’s use.  ek-stase : Sartre borrows this term ( Ekstase in German) from Heidegger.  Heidegger intends to exploit the Greek root meaning of the word (which is generally used to mean “displacement” or “removal”), i.e., “standing-outside.” The hyphen in Sartre’s French also emphasizes this etymology.  In using ecstasis and ecstases (plural), I follow the English translation of Heidegger (1980) and therefore drop the hyphen.  en sursis : This expression is often used in French to mean “suspended” (e.g., in the judicial context of a suspended sentence), “pending,” or “outstanding” (e.g., with reference to unpaid bills).  It is highly probable that Sartre took it from Corbin’s translations of Heidegger, where en sursis is used to translate the German noun Ausstand (something “outstanding,” as in the financial sense just cited).  The basic idea, then, in connection with human-reality, is that its life always stretches before it as something not yet “settled.” For these reasons I translate the phrase as “suspended” or “pending.” être-dans-le-monde, être au milieu du monde : In Being and Time and other writings from the same period, Heidegger argues that our way of being in the world is wholly different from the way things —worldly objects—are in the world.  The hyphens that he often uses—Being-in-the-world—emphasize the indissolubility of our connection to the world we inhabit, a world that “concerns” us.  In contrast to this, the relation of worldly objects to the world that surrounds them is one of indifference; they are merely in the world spatially , and not involved in it (Heidegger 1980: §12).  This merely spatial relation is rendered in some English translations as being within the world.  I have translated the phrases with which Sartre makes the same distinction as “being in the world” and “being-in-the-midst-of-the-world” respectively.  He is inconsistent in his use of hyphens.  facticité : This term is the French translation of the German word Faktizität , which appears frequently in Heidegger’s philosophy, where it refers to the “fact-like” aspects of Dasein ’s being.  From the German, it is usually translated into English as “facticity”; as Sartre takes over the term from Heidegger, I translate it the same way.  historialiser, s’historialiser : This verb was coined by Corbin, in his translation of Heidegger, which is presumably Sartre’s source (French dictionaries do not give earlier usages).  It refers to Dasein ’s basic constitutive capacity to “be historical.” Although Macquarrie and Robinson (in Heidegger 1980: see §6) translate it into English as “to historize,” I think it better to map Sartre’s term more closely, and I translate it therefore as “to historialize,” etc.  (Sartre does not use it consistently, sometimes using historiciser —which I render as “to historicize”—instead.) Following Sartre, other French thinkers (e.g., Paul Ricoeur) have used this verb.  il y a (and grammatical variants): Sartre sometimes uses this ordinary French phrase (which means “there is” or “there are”) with the intention of alluding to Heidegger’s use of the roughly synonymous German phrase es gibt .  In emphasizing this phrase, Heidegger wants to direct the reader’s attention to two ideas: the idea of an event or happening (rather than a state); and (via the verb geben ) the idea of giving , i.e., that Being is “given” to Dasein .  At its first appearance and on occasional later ones (where I think signaling is helpful), I have inserted il y a in square brackets to remind the reader.  Sartre frequently highlights this phrase himself (with italics, etc.): the reader should bear in mind the implicit allusion to Heidegger.  ipséité : Sartre would have found this term in Corbin’s translations of Heidegger, where it translates Heidegger’s Selbstheit , which is usually translated into English as “selfhood.” Independently of his dialogue with Heidegger, Sartre also uses the word to characterize the for-itself’s reflexive relationship to itself.  The French ipséité builds on the Latin word ipse ( itself ) and is rare in French usage.  As the Latinate term can be easily anglicized as “ipseity,” I think that is how it should be translated.  on, l’on : Although the French term on is translated literally into the English “one,” Sartre frequently uses it (implicitly or explicitly) to translate Heidegger’s notion “ das Man .” This expression (which is also used in everyday German) is usually translated into English as “the they.” The reader needs to keep in mind that here, as in Heidegger’s usage, the sense of “they” at play is that vague, anonymous idea, as in “they say that the weather will improve.” possibiliser : Sartre would have found this verb in Corbin’s translations of Heidegger.  Corbin uses it to translate Heidegger’s German verb ermöglichen , which means “to make possible.” As possibiliser is rare in French, and as Heidegger often italicizes the verb in German in order to emphasize its structure, I have used the neologism “to possibilize” in English.  Sartre sometimes contrasts it with probabiliser , which I translate as “to probabilize.” possibilité, possible : Sartre seems to use the substantive le possible (“the possible”) interchangeably with la possibilité (“possibility”).  As “the possible” sounds terrible in English, and I cannot discern any difference in meaning between the two terms, as Sartre uses them, I considered the option of collapsing them into a single English noun “possibility.” However, Sartre may have thought he was working with a real distinction (originating perhaps in Heidegger and/or Leibniz, both of whom are important background figures to discussions of “possibility” in the text).  The conservative option seemed best.  projet, projeter, pro-jet, pro-jeter : I translate these respectively as “project” (noun), “to project” (verb), “pro-ject” (neologistic noun), and “to pro-ject” (neologistic verb).  Sartre takes the hyphenated usage from Corbin, who seeks in turn to do justice to Heidegger’s exploitation of the semantic resources of the German verb entwerfen (to design, sketch) and the noun der Entwurf (sketch, blueprint, etc.).  Heidegger often connects these words with the similar-sounding verb werfen (“to throw”) and its cognates (e.g., geworfen ).  Corbin’s choice of pro-jet , etc., allowed him to retain this connection with the idea of “throwing” ( jeter ) in the French, a connection that is less obvious in the English.  réalité-humaine : As discussed earlier, Corbin used this phrase to translate Heidegger’s term Dasein , and Sartre borrows it from Corbin.  I translate it straightforwardly as “human-reality.” English translators of Heidegger often leave Dasein untranslated.  ustensile, ustensilité, le complexe… des réalités ustensiles : Sartre borrows these terms from Corbin’s translation of Heidegger.  I translate complexe d’ustensiles as “structure of equipment” and the ungainly ustensilité as “equipmentality.” I translate ustensile on its own as “implement.” Bergson vocabulary Commentators have argued that the influence of the philosopher Henri Bergson (1859–1941) on BN is usually underestimated.  As a student, Sartre had read a great deal of Bergson, whose influence on French philosophy only began to decline later in the twentieth century.  There are passages in BN where Sartre is recognizably in dialogue with Bergson but does not explicitly say so.  Of course, because Bergson’s philosophy is written in French, it has not caused any additional translation difficulties.  For the most part I retain the vocabulary used by Bergson’s English translators.  durée, durer : I have followed Bergson’s translators in rendering durée —Bergson’s term for lived time—as “duration,” and the verb durer as “to endure.” élan vital : This is one of Bergson’s most famous concepts, usually translated as “vital impulse.” It is possible that Sartre has it in mind when he uses the term élan in relation to the for-itself.  For this reason I translate élan in these contexts as “impulse.” fantôme : Bergson often uses this adjective; following Bergson translators, I translate it as “phantom.” Negative vocabulary néant : I have followed Barnes in translating this noun as “nothingness” (see discussion above).  Although it is an unusual word in French and in English, it has been available in both these languages for many centuries.  In French, it can be found in Descartes and Pascal.  In English, it is used by John Donne in his poem “A Nocturnal upon St.  Lucy’s Day” (first published in 1633).  négatité : See the entry for this term under “Neologisms and ungrammatical locutions.” nier : This French verb corresponds to two different English verbs: “to deny” and “to negate.” This can cause difficulty in some contexts, and especially in relation to Hegel’s philosophy: the French nier manifests its proximity to the idea of negation ( négation in French; negieren or verneinen in German), whereas the connection is far less obvious in the English verb “to deny.” The use of “to negate” throughout, however, results in clumsy English sentences: for example, pour nier de ce Pierre… qu’il soit là (EN 61) will translate as “to negate, in relation to this Pierre… his being there,” which leads us far from ordinary English.  For this stylistic reason, I sometimes translate nier as “deny.” The reader should bear in mind that “deny” and “negate” have a common ancestor in the Latin verb negare .  Words and metaphors for movement Sartre repeatedly emphasizes the dynamic nature of the for-itself by characterizing it with various movement verbs.  He often draws (metaphorically or quasi-metaphorically) on dynamic vocabulary whose literal use is to describe natural processes or events.  Many of these verbs also convey the idea of upward movement.  These verbs do not always translate easily into ordinary English, especially when Sartre uses the substantive form: we would not ordinarily say, for example, that the for-itself is a “bursting forth” or an “upheaval.” It may be helpful for the reader to note the following examples of this kind of vocabulary.  jaillir, jaillissement : The verb jaillir is often used for movements of water—for example, in contexts where we might translate as “to spring up,” “to gush,” “to spurt,” “to burst out,” etc.  I have often rendered this by “to burst forth.” surgir, surgissement : See my discussion above.  surrection : The relatively rare French term surrection is geological, referring to an upheaval or “uplift” of land, an area that has been elevated.  I have translated it as “elevation” (e.g., EN 174).  Other words worthy of note affecter, s’affecter : The verb affecter often straightforwardly means “to affect” (i.e., to have an effect on something), but its reflexive form s’affecter can be harder to translate.  While it can mean “to affect oneself,” Sartre often uses it with the preposition de in more abstract contexts, where the meaning is closer to “to assign” (e.g., a property to X) or “to endow” (e.g., X with a property).  At EN 58, for example, Sartre writes that l’homme… s’affecte lui-même de non-être à cette fin : in cases like this I have often used “to assign.” apparence, apparition : Sartre uses both these words throughout BN.  Although in many instances they appear to be interchangeable, there can be a difference in meaning in French.  Apparence is more frequently used to mean “appearance” in the philosophical sense (as, for example, in the appearance/reality distinction); apparition means “appearance” in the sense of an event —for example, an unannounced appearance at a party, etc.  If both these French terms are translated into English as “appearance,” this distinction is of course hidden.  However, Sartre does not explicitly indicate any intention to use these words with distinct senses in BN, and nor does he consistently use them with identifiably different meanings.  In addition, “apparition” is a very unusual word in English and, used as a substantive, “an appearing” often sounds odd.  I have therefore often used “appearance” for both these terms, using “appearing” instead only when it seems important to convey the event-like sense of apparition .  assumer : Sartre often uses this French verb in the sense in which it means “to take on/up” (e.g., a role or responsibility).  Although the English verb “assume” can also be used in this sense (e.g., “to assume the leadership”), it is more frequently used in everyday English to mean “to presuppose.” To avoid confusion in the English, I have used “assume” only sparingly in these contexts, varying it with “to take up” and “to accept.” l’autre, autrui, les autres : Sartre uses all of these terms to refer to another person or other people.  Although in most cases the French term autrui (which, although it has no plural form, can refer to either one or more than one person) is synonymous with l’autre (or les autres ), it has an old-fashioned and literary quality and is rarely used in everyday speech.  The Littré dictionary suggests that autrui can have the sense of “this person here”; used with this sense, it may oppose the person spoken about (rather than people in general) to the speaker.  Now, Sartre’s account of interpersonal relations emphasizes the case in which one person stands in (asymmetric) opposition to another; one person looks, while the Other is looked at.  For this reason I translate autrui as “ the Other” (i.e., in the singular), capitalizing it in order to signal that it means another person.  I translate les autres and l’autre slightly less strictly, using “others,” “another” or sometimes “an other person” (leaving the o lowercase), where this makes the sense clearer.  Sartre is not consistent in his terminology but I have avoided eliminating the difference (between autrui and alternative terms) from the translation.  conduite(s) : I translate most occurrences of this everyday French word as “behavior,” but I avoid the plural “behaviors,” as it is less common in English.  To handle Sartre’s frequent use of conduites (plural), I sometimes use “forms of behavior” or a different synonymous noun.  conscience : This noun is used in French to mean both “consciousness” and “conscience” (e.g., moral conscience).  In the first sense, the term appears throughout BN in various different contexts.  (i) Sartre uses conscience to refer to consciousness quite generally as a mode of being and (ii) as in English, the same term can be used to apply to some particular consciousness, as in “my” or “his” consciousness.  Neither (i) nor (ii) causes difficulty in translation.  (iii) In addition, conscience can be used in French, but not in English, to refer to particular conscious events , as for example at EN 311: la notion même de conscience ne fait que renvoyer à mes consciences possibles , where the latter half of this phrase means “to my possible acts of consciousness.” Here I have sometimes inserted “acts of” into the translation, to make the meaning clearer.  (iv) Sartre sometimes uses the plural form i.e., consciences  to refer, for example, to the coexisting “consciousnesses” of two or more people.  Although this English plural (“consciousnesses”) is clunky, I have not always been able to avoid it.  (v) The reader should note that the French phrase avoir conscience de translates as “to be conscious of.” The translation will therefore replace French avoir (“to have”) with “to be.” I do not think this causes difficulty, but, as both verbs are charged with philosophical import in BN, it is worth pointing out.  conscience (de) soi : Sartre uses this phrase to describe the basic reflexivity of human consciousness.  When he first introduces it (at EN 20), he explains that his reason for placing the preposition de in brackets is in order to emphasize the non-positionality of this mode of consciousness; in it, the “self” is not presented to the subject as a possible object of knowledge .  Without any brackets, the French phrase conscience de soi means “self-consciousness” and, since that English phrase has no preposition, Barnes decided she could use it (see her footnote to Sartre 1965: liv).  To my ear, however, “self-consciousness” may still suggest a “positional” attitude (in which the subject confronts his “self”) of the kind Sartre wishes to avoid, and so I use phrases that retain Sartre’s brackets.  A further question about soi arises: Should soi be translated as “self” or as “itself?” Although the latter has some advantages (for example, it harmonizes with Sartre’s view that there is no substantial “self” at the most basic level of first-personal experience), I think that to use it would be to over-interpret.  Sartre’s use of the phrase “prereflective cogito ” (as well as “ipseity”) registers that there is a self-like structure in consciousness (albeit not a substantial one) which, he argues, provides the ground of reflective self-consciousness.  dépasser : Sartre sometimes uses this verb in its everyday sense, to mean “to go beyond,” “to reach beyond,” “to exceed,” “to outstrip,” etc.  Where the context is of this kind, I have chosen from this range of words, in a way that maximizes stylistic fluency.  See above for uses of this verb in connection with Hegel and Heidegger.  engager, s’engager : This verb often means “to engage” or “to be/become engaged” in the physical sense in which we might say a cog was engaged in machinery.  However, as in English, it can also be used to mean “to commit (oneself)” as well as “to enlist” (e.g., in the army).  Given Sartre’s emphasis on human responsibility and choice, the best translation in many contexts is “to commit,” but the reader should bear in mind the range of meaning.  être (and phrases using this verb): As BN is a work of “phenomenological ontology” and heavily influenced by Heidegger, the verb “to be” and the (sometimes neologistic) uses that Sartre makes of it are extremely important.  Two constructions that should be noted are the ungrammatical locution “ être été ” (discussed earlier) and avoir à être .  This latter phrase is used by Sartre to indicate the future-oriented, dynamic and responsible aspects of the for-itself: rather than simply “being” something (e.g., myself) or some way, I have it to be .  Although it can be quite simply translated into English as “to have to be,” the reader needs to be careful in some instances not to read the phrase in the sense that involves the idea of obligation .  If the for-itself “has X to be,” it is not obliged to be X but chooses itself as being or aspiring to be X.  extériorité d’indifférence : This phrase, which translates literally but cumbersomely as “exteriority of indifference,” occurs frequently in BN.  Both the idea and the language are familiar in the German Idealist tradition, but less so in contemporary anglophone philosophy: Sartre would have found them in Hegel as well as Bergson.  In both these philosophers, the adjectives “external” and “indifferent” are used to describe one form of relatedness, in contrast to another.  Hegel, for example, holds that in mechanistic thinking an object consists of parts that are interrelated only “externally” and are “indifferent” to each other.  This contrasts with objects that exhibit a genuine, intrinsic unity—for example, the soul, whose parts are not “indifferent” to each other.  I translate this phrase as “indifferent externality.” Although “exteriority” is also available in English, “externality” has the advantage of establishing continuity with many English translations of Hegel and Bergson.  (Note, however, that the second part of the title of Levinas’s famous book Totalité et Infini: Essai sur l’extériorité has been translated into English as “An Essay on Exteriority” (Levinas 1969).) manquer, le manque : The verb means “to miss something” or “to lack something”; the noun means “lack.” Sartre uses these terms in some extremely complicated sentences to describe the relations in play where something is incomplete; the frequent repetition of m sounds is a feature of the original text.  The following sentence from (EN 122) includes the phrases built on manquer that Sartre uses most often in the text: Un manque suppose une trinité: ce qui manque ou manquant, ce à quoi manque ce qui manque ou existant, et une totalité qui a été désagrégée par le manque et qui serait restaurée par la synthèse du manquant et de l’existant: c’est le manqué.  I translate the phrase ce qui manque as “the missing item.” The noun which follows— le manquant —can be used in French to refer to a missing thing (e.g., a missing person), and Sartre uses it here as a synonym for ce qui manque , but, as “missing” cannot be used that way in English, I have omitted this synonym from the corresponding English sentence (and for the second manquant of the quoted passage I have reused “the missing item”).  I have translated ce à quoi manque ce qui manque as “that from which the missing item is missing,” le manque as “the lack,” and the final phrase c’est le manqué as “that which is missed.” Sartre often puns by also using manqué in the way we sometimes use it in English (i.e., to mean “failed”); where it is not obvious, I have signaled this.  originel(le) : Sartre uses this adjective frequently to mean “original,” in the sense of “pertaining to the origin” (as in “original sin”).  Because “original” in English is also often used to mean “inventive” or “new,” I considered using “originary” instead, but this would undercut associations of “original” that one might want to keep: for example, Sartre’s “original choice” has often been compared to a similar idea in Kant’s philosophy.  In the end I decided to stick to “original” for most instances, but the reader should bear Sartre’s intended sense in mind.  positivité, positive : Although it is rare in English philosophy to find “positivity” used as a noun, the French term is well established.  Sartre would have been familiar with it from the writings of Auguste Comte (1798–1857), who coined the term “positivism.” For Comte, the sciences could be ranked in a hierarchy according to their degree of “positivity,” or the extent to which the phenomena they studied could be demonstrated or measured.  Sartre often uses “positivity” in opposition to “negativity,” to refer to something unquestionably “real,” capable of being affirmed.  Because of this semi-technical context, I have translated the term as “positivity.” I also use the related adjective “positive” in this sense.  réaliser, se realiser, irréalisable : Sartre uses the verb quite often with the sense of “to make real.” Although the English verb “to realize” can be used with that sense, using it to translate réaliser will sometimes produce English sentences that are easily misconstrued as meaning “to realize” in the more common, cognitive sense, i.e., to become aware of something.  My policy has been to use “to actualize” most of the time, where the intended sense is “to make real.” However, Sartre also uses the noun irréalisable to refer to something that cannot be made real.  Here I translate irréalisable as “unrealizable” and, if Sartre uses the verb réaliser in the same context, I either translate the verb in that context as “to realize” or insert “to realize” in square brackets, to remind the reader of the connection to the unrealizable.  In addition, at EN 216 Sartre comments on the “double meaning” (ontological and gnostic) of the French verb réaliser : obviously, the verb needs to be translated here as “to realize.” reflet, reflétant, réflexion, réfléchi : This cluster of terms, already philosophically complicated in the text, presents additional difficulties in translation because the English fails to distinguish (by means of different spellings) between the types of “reflection” that Sartre is able to keep distinct by using two slightly different French verbs ( réfléchir and refléter ).  It will help if the reader keeps in mind Sartre’s view that there is one basic form of “reflection” that is a permanent and necessary structure of consciousness.  For this, Sartre uses the French verb refléter , which means “to reflect” in the sense of “to cast back an image/light,” i.e., in the sense in which a mirror reflects.  In this context Sartre often uses the hyphenated phrase reflet-reflétant to describe the back-and-forth play of reflections within consciousness.  I translate this phrase as “reflection-reflecting.” Sartre uses the different verb— réfléchir —to refer to a different type, or second level, of reflection—a cognitive act—in which consciousness takes itself as an object.  According to Sartre, this kind of reflection is liable to distort what it reflects on; this is “complicit” reflection, which Sartre contrasts with “pure” reflection.  Because of the close connection in meaning (cognitive reflection can be seen to be a kind of “mirroring” of our minds), I do not think the answer would be to use two different verbs in English.  In most cases the context makes it clear which type of reflection Sartre is talking about, but where I think it is possible that confusion may arise, I have provided a clarifying footnote.  regarder, le regard : For Sartre, the experience of le regard (usually translated as “the look”) is fundamental to our experience of the Other.  Shame is a paradigmatic instance of that experience, insofar precisely as it involves our being looked at by someone else.  Unfortunately, the effect of translating le regard as the noun “(the) look” is to produce some infelicitous English sentences.  For example, un regard à éviter is better translated as “to avoid being seen” rather than by “a look to be avoided”; similarly, son regard fixé à terre translates well as “his gaze fixed to the ground,” whereas “his look” in this sentence is terrible.  However, the danger of these stylistically preferable alternatives is that they may distract from, or dilute the force of, “the look,” which is almost a technical term in BN.  I have compromised by sticking to “the look” most of the time, and using “gaze” occasionally in the interests of style.  tendance : Early translations of Freud into French often used the noun tendance (“tendency” in English) to translate the German term Trieb —which corresponds to “drive” in English.  But this is not an ideal choice (at least not when tendance is translated again into English), because “tendency” sounds much weaker (and less instinctual) than “drive.” Where Sartre is clearly in dialogue with Freud, therefore, I translate tendance as “drive,” but elsewhere I sometimes use “tendency.” le visqueux, la viscosité : Hazel Barnes translated these terms as “slime”(adjective “slimy”); her aim, she tells us in a footnote, was to make the figurative meanings of the French and English terms correspond (Sartre 1965: 604).  It is true that Sartre often uses visqueux figuratively and intends it to have unpleasant associations.  On the other hand, some of these figurative uses are creative even in French, and in some instances “slimy” has, I think, an overly negative force.  Moreover there are good reasons for translating visqueux straightforwardly as “viscous.” Sartre’s debt to Gaston Bachelard’s “psychoanalysis of things” (an exploration of the psychological meaning of natural elements) is explicit, and this precedent is important.  Both Bachelard and Sartre are concerned with the psychological significance of forms of materiality : the word “viscous,” with its scientific or chemical register is, I think, best suited for this.  References Bergson, Henri (1911), Creative Evolution , trans.  Arthur Mitchell (New York: Henry Holt).  De Waelhens, Alphonse (1942), La Philosophie de Martin Heidegger (Louvain: Éditions de l’Institut Supérieur de Philosophie).  Hegel, G.  W.  F.  (1995), Morceaux Choisis , trans.  H.  Lefebvre and N.  Guterman (Paris: Gallimard Folio).  Heidegger, Martin (1938), Qu’est-ce que la Métaphysique? Suivi d’Extraits sur l’Être et le Temps et d’une Conference sur Hölderlin , trans.  Henry Corbin (Paris: Gallimard).  Heidegger, Martin (1980), Being and Time , trans.  J.  Macquarrie and E.  Robinson (Oxford: Blackwell).  Husserl, Edmund (1983), Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , First Book, trans.  F.  Kersten (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff).  Inwood, Michael (1999), “Does the Nothing Noth?,” in O’Hear (ed.) (1999): 271–290.  Kirkpatrick, Kate (2017), Sartre and Theology (London: Bloomsbury).  Levinas, Emmanuel (1969), Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority , trans.  Alphonso Lingis (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press).  Levinas, Emmanuel (1995), The Theory of Intuition in Husserl’s Phenomenology , trans.  André Orianne (2nd edition) (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press).  O’Hear, Anthony (ed.) (1999), German Philosophy since Kant (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  Olafson, F.  A.  (1958), “Review of Being and Nothingness by Jean-Paul Sartre and Hazel E.  Barnes,” Philosophical Review , 67 (2): 276–280.  Sartre, Jean-Paul (1965), Being and Nothingness , trans.  and introduced by Hazel Barnes (New York: Washington Square Press).  1 With respect to the question of heteronormativity, some aspects of Sartre’s theoretical account of human sexuality are interestingly ambiguous.  His disagreement with biologically based theories leads him to deny the importance of physiological sexual difference and to claim that heterosexuality is not fundamental to sexual relations (EN 424), although a few pages later he also states that in our culture we do not often desire others “of the same sex” (EN 427).  Chapter 1: Being and Doing: Freedom II.  FREEDOM AND FACTICITY: THE SITUATION The decisive argument brought by “good sense” against freedom is a reminder of our powerlessness.  Far from being able to change our situation at will, it seems that we are unable to change ourselves.  I am not “free” to escape the destiny of my class, my nation, my family, or even to build up my power or my wealth, or to overcome my most trivial appetites or habits.  I am born a worker, French, with inherited syphilis or tuberculosis.  Whatever it may be, the history of a life is a history of a failure.  The coefficient of adversity of things is such that it takes years of patience to obtain the tiniest result.  And still it will be necessary to “obey nature in order to command it,” 36 i.e., to insert my action within the mesh of determinism.  Man seems far less to “make himself” than “to be made,” by climate and soil, race and class, language, the history of the community to which he belongs, heredity, the individual circumstances of his childhood, the habits he acquires, the major and minor events of his life.  This argument has never seriously troubled the advocates of human freedom: Descartes was the first to acknowledge that the will is infinite and at the same time that we have to “endeavor to conquer ourselves rather than fortune.” 37 The point is that we need to draw some distinctions here; many of the facts pronounced by the determinists cannot be taken into account.  In particular, the coefficient of adversity of things cannot be an argument against our freedom, because it is through us , which is to say by means of an end that we have posited beforehand, that this coefficient of adversity arises.  This rock, which manifests a profound resistance if I want to move it, will on the contrary become a valuable aid if I want to climb up it in order to contemplate the landscape.  In itself—if it is even possible to consider how it might be in itself—it is neutral, which is to say that, before it can show itself to be an adversary or a help, it awaits the illumination of an end.  And further, it can show itself in one or the other way only within an equipment-structure that has already been established.  Without the pickaxes and ice axes, the paths that have already been traced, the climbing technique, the rock will be neither easy nor difficult to climb; the question would not arise, and would not sustain a relation of any kind with the technique of mountaineering.  Thus, although brute things (what Heidegger calls “brute existents”) may limit our freedom of action from the outset, it is our freedom itself which must previously have constituted the framework, the technique, and the ends, in relation to which these things will show themselves to be limits.  If the rock even reveals itself to be “too difficult to climb” and if we have to give up the ascent, we should note that it has only revealed itself as such by virtue of having been originally apprehended as “climbable”; it is our freedom therefore which constitutes the limits it will thereafter encounter.  Of course, after these remarks, an unnameable and unthinkable residuum remains, which belongs to the in-itself in question and which makes it the case that, within a world that is lit up by our freedom, this rock will be conducive to climbing, and this other one will not.  But this residue is far from being an original limit to freedom; rather, it is thanks to it—i.e., thanks to the brute in-itself, as such—that our freedom can arise as freedom.  Common sense agrees with us, indeed, that a being who can be said to be free is one whose projects can be actualized .  But for the act to be able to involve an actualization we need to be able to distinguish, a priori , the mere projection of a possible end from the actualization of that end.  If it is sufficient to conceive of something for it to be actualized, I will find myself suddenly plunged into a world resembling the dream-world, where the possible is no longer in any way distinct from the real.  I am condemned, then, to see the world changing in accordance with the changes of my consciousness; I cannot exercise, in relation to my conception, the “bracketing” and the suspension of judgment that would distinguish a mere fiction from a real choice.  An object that appears the minute it is merely conceived will no longer be either chosen or only wished for.  With the abolition of the distinction between a mere wish , a representation that I might be able to choose, and the choice , freedom will disappear too.  We are free when the ultimate term, by which we are acquainted with what we are, is an end —which is to say not a real existent which, like the one in the hypothesis we have just entertained, appears in order to fulfill our wish but an object which does not yet exist.  But on this basis, this end can be transcendent only if it is separated from us at the same time as it is accessible.  We can be separated from this end only by a set of real existents—just as this end can be conceived only as a forth-coming state of the real existents separating me from it.  It is nothing more than the outline of an order of existents, which is to say of a series of positions into which the existents will be placed, on the basis of their current relations.  Through its internal-negation, in fact, the for-itself lights up the existents in their mutual relationships through the end that it posits, and projects this end on the basis of the specifications it apprehends in the existents.  As we have seen, this is not circular, because the for-itself arises all at once.  But if that is so, the order of the existents is itself indispensable for freedom itself: they are what separate it from, and reunite it with, its pursued end, by which it is acquainted with what it is.  In consequence, the resistances disclosed by freedom in the existent, far from being a danger to freedom, only allow it to arise as freedom.  There can only be a free for-itself if it is committed within a resisting world.  Outside this commitment, the notions of freedom, determinism, and necessity lose all of their meaning.  In addition, we must make it quite clear, against common sense, that the phrase “to be free” does not mean “to obtain what one wanted” but “to be determined in one’s wanting (in the broad sense of “choosing”) by oneself.” In other words, success makes no difference to freedom.  The argument which opposes common sense to the philosophers stems here from a misunderstanding: the popular and empirical concept of “freedom,” produced by historical, political, and moral circumstances, is equivalent to the “ability to obtain the ends one has chosen.” The technical and philosophical concept of freedom, which is the only one we are considering here, only means: the autonomy of choice.  We must note, however, that, since any choice is identical to some doing , it presupposes, in order for it to be distinct from a dream or a wish, that its actualization has begun.  Thus we are not saying that a prisoner is always free to get out of prison, which would be absurd, nor that he is always free to wish for his release, which would be a statement of the obvious that lacked any impact, but that he is always free to seek an escape (or to be freed)—i.e., that, whatever his condition, he can pro-ject his escape and learn for himself about his project’s value by beginning to act.  Our description of freedom, which does not distinguish between choosing and doing, obliges us for that reason to give up any distinction between the intention and the action.  The intention can no more be separated from the action than thought from the language that expresses it and, as it can happen that we can learn our thoughts from our words, so our actions can teach us our intentions, which is to say they can enable us to extricate them, schematize them, and make objects out of them, rather than limiting ourselves to living them, i.e., to being non-thetically conscious of them.  This essential distinction between the freedom of choice and the freedom to obtain was certainly seen by Descartes, following the Stoics.  It puts an end to all the debates about “willing” something and “being able to do” it, in which the advocates of freedom remain opposed to its adversaries today.  It remains no less true that freedom encounters, or seems to encounter, limits by virtue of the given that it surpasses or nihilates.  To show that a thing’s coefficient of adversity, and its character as an obstacle (together with its character as an implement), is indispensable to the existence of a freedom is to make use of an argument that cuts two ways, because, if it enables us to establish that freedom is not curtailed by the given, it points on the other hand to something like an ontological conditioning of freedom.  Might we not have grounds for saying, along with some contemporary philosophers: there is no freedom without an obstacle? And as we cannot allow that freedom creates its obstacle by itself—which will strike anyone who has understood what a spontaneity is as absurd—we seem to have here something like an ontological primacy of the in-itself over the for-itself.  We must therefore regard our earlier remarks as simply an attempt to clear the ground, and take up the question of facticity again, from the beginning.  We established that the for-itself was free.  38 But that does not mean that it is its own foundation.  If to be free meant to be its own foundation, freedom would have to decide its being’s existence .  And this necessity can be understood in two ways.  First, freedom would have to decide its being-free, i.e., it would not only have to be the choice of some end but to choose itself as freedom.  This would presuppose, therefore, that the possibility of being free and the possibility of not being free existed equally before any free choice of one of them—i.e., before any free choice of freedom.  But as that would require an antecedent freedom choosing to be free, we would be in an infinite regress, because that freedom would require another earlier freedom in order to choose, and so on.  In fact, we are a freedom that chooses, but we do not choose to be free: we are condemned to freedom, as we said earlier, thrown into freedom or—as Heidegger says—“abandoned.” 39 And, as we can see, this abandonment has no other origin than the very existence of freedom.  If therefore we define freedom as the escape from the given, from fact, there is a fact about the escape from fact.  It is the facticity of freedom.  But the fact that freedom is not its foundation may be understood in another way, which will lead to identical conclusions.  If in fact freedom could decide the existence of its being, not only would being as not-free have to be possible but, further, my absolute nonexistence would also have to be possible.  In other words, we saw that the end, in freedom’s initial project, turns back toward its reasons in order to constitute them; but, if freedom was obliged to be its foundation, the end would in addition have to turn back toward existence itself, in order to make it arise.  We can see what the result would be: the for-itself would be drawn out of nothingness in order to attain its self-proposed end.  This would be a de jure existence, legitimized by its end, not an existence de facto .  And it is true that there is one way—among the thousand ways in which the for-itself tries to separate itself from its original contingency—which consists in trying to make oneself recognized by the Other as a de jure existence.  We are only concerned with our individual rights within the framework of a vast project whose goal is to confer our existence on us on the basis of the work that we do.  It is for that reason that men so often try to identify themselves with their work, and try to see themselves as nothing but “the President of the Court of Appeal,” “the Paymaster,” etc.  The existence of each of these jobs is justified by its end.  To be identified with one of them is to hold one’s own existence as rescued from contingency.  But these efforts to escape from original contingency only establish its existence more strongly.  Freedom cannot decide its existence through the end it posits.  Of course, it only exists through the choice that it makes of an end, but it does not govern the fact that there is a freedom, whose end acquaints it with what it is.  A freedom that was able to produce itself in its existence would have lost just what freedom means.  In fact freedom is not a simple, undetermined power.  If it were so, it would be a nothingness or in-itself—and it is a deviant synthesis of the in-itself with nothingness that has made it possible to conceive it as a bare power, preexisting its choices.  It determines itself, simply by arising, as a “doing”  faire .  But, as we saw, doing something requires the nihilation of a given.  We make something out of something.  In this way freedom is a lack of being in relation to a given being—not the arising of some full being.  And if it is this hole in being, this nothingness of being as we have just said, it requires all of being in order to arise as a hole in the heart of being.  It cannot therefore determine itself in existence on the basis of nothingness, because anything produced on the basis of nothingness could only be being-in-itself.  We have proved moreover, in Part One of this work, that nothingness could not appear anywhere unless it was at the heart of being.  At this point we meet the requirements of common sense: empirically, we can be free only in relation to a state of affairs, and in spite of this state of affairs.  We say that I am free in relation to this state of affairs when it does not constrain me.  In this way, the empirical and practical conception of freedom is wholly negative; it starts by considering a situation and noting that this situation leaves me free to pursue this or that end.  We might even say that this situation conditions my freedom, in the sense in which it is there in order not to constrain me .  Remove the prohibition on walking the streets after the curfew, and what could my freedom to walk about at night (which a permit, for example, has conferred on me) mean? Thus freedom is a lesser being, which presupposes being, in order to subtract itself from it.  It is free neither to not exist nor to not be free.  We can grasp the connection between these two structures immediately; in effect, because freedom is an escape from being, it cannot occur beside being, as if it approached being laterally with the aim of surveying it: one cannot escape from a jail in which one is not locked up.  A projection of the self at the margin of being can in no way constitute itself as a nihilation of this being.  Freedom is an escape from an engagement within being; it is the nihilation of a being that it is .  That does not mean that human-reality exists first , in order to be free afterward .  “Afterward” and “first” are terms created by freedom itself.  The movement through which freedom arises is made simply through the twofold nihilation of the being that it is , and the being in whose midst it is.  Naturally, it is not this being in the sense of being-in-itself.  But it makes it happen that there is , behind it, this being which it is, by illuminating it in its deficiencies, in the light of the end it chooses.  Freedom has to be this being, behind it, which it has not chosen and, to precisely the extent to which it turns back toward it to illuminate it, it makes it happen that this being which belongs to it appears in relation with the plenum of being, which is to say that it exists in the midst of the world.  We said that freedom is not free to not be free and that it is not free to not exist.  The point is indeed that the fact of not being able to not be free is freedom’s facticity , and the fact of not being able not to exist is its contingency .  Contingency and facticity are one and the same: there is a being which freedom has to be in the form of not being (which is to say nihilating) it.  To exist—as the fact of freedom—or to have, in the midst of the world, a being to be is one and the same thing, which means that freedom is from the outset a relation to the given .  But what is this relation to the given? And should we take that to mean that the given (the in-itself) conditions freedom? Let us take a closer look: the given is not the cause of freedom (since it can only produce more given), nor its reason (since any “reason” comes into the world through freedom).  Neither is it a necessary condition of freedom, since we are in the domain of pure contingency.  Neither is it an indispensable matter , to which freedom has to apply itself, because that would presuppose that freedom exists ready-made, as an Aristotelian form or a Stoic pneuma , and seeks a matter to work on.  The given plays no role in constituting freedom, since freedom internalizes itself as an internal negation of the given.  It is simply the pure contingency which freedom applies itself to negating as it makes itself a choice; it is the plenitude of being that freedom colors with insufficiency and negatity, as it illuminates it in the light of an end that does not exist; it is freedom itself insofar as it exists —and insofar as, whatever it does, it cannot escape its existence.  The reader will have understood that this given is nothing but the in-itself nihilated by the for-itself which has it to be, or the body as the point of view on the world, or the past as the essence which the for-itself was: three ways of referring to the same reality.  Through the nihilating step it takes back, freedom establishes a system of relations, from the point of view of its end, between the in-itselfs (in the “plural”), which is to say between the plenum of being which is here revealed as world and the being that it has to be in the midst of this plenum , and which is revealed as a being, as a “this” which it has to be.  Thus, through its very projection toward an end, freedom constitutes a particular datum that it has to be as a being, in the midst of the world.  It does not choose it, for that would be to choose its own existence; rather, through the choice it makes of its end, it makes it happen that it reveals itself in this or that way, in this or that light, in connection with the discovery of the world itself.  Thus, freedom’s very contingency, and the world which surrounds that contingency with its own contingency, will appear to it only in the light of the end it has chosen, which is to say not as brute existents but in the unity of the light thrown by the same nihilation.  And freedom can never grasp this whole as a pure datum , because that would require it to be outside all choice and, therefore, to cease to be freedom.  Let us say that the “ situation ” is freedom’s contingency within the world’s plenum of being, insofar as this datum , which is there only in order not to constrain freedom , is revealed to that freedom only as already lit up by the end that it chooses.  In this way the datum never appears to the for-itself as a brute and in-itself existent; it is always encountered as a reason , since it is revealed only in the light of an end which illuminates it.  Situation and motivation are one and the same.  The for-itself discovers itself as engaged within being, invested with being, threatened by being; it discovers the state of affairs surrounding it as a reason for reacting defensively, or by an attack.  But it can make this discovery only because it freely posits the end in relation to which the state of affairs is threatening or advantageous.  We should learn from these remarks that the situation —a joint project of the contingency of the in-itself and of freedom—is an ambiguous phenomenon within which it is impossible for the for-itself to discern the contributions of freedom and the brute existent.  Indeed, just as freedom is an escape from a contingency which it has to be, in order to escape from it, so is the situation a free coordination and free qualification of a brute given which cannot be qualified in just any way.  There I am at the foot of this rock, which seems to me to be “not climbable.” Therefore the rock appears to me in the light of a projected rock-climbing—a secondary project whose meaning is given on the basis of an initial project which is my being-in-the-world.  In this way the rock is outlined against the ground of the world as a result of the initial choice of my freedom.  But, on the other hand, what my freedom is unable to decide is whether or not the rock “to be climbed” will lend itself to my climbing.  That forms part of the rock’s brute being.  However, the rock can only manifest its resistance to the climbing if it is included by freedom within a “situation” whose general theme is rock-climbing.  For the walker who is simply passing by on the road, and whose free project is purely the aesthetic ordering of the landscape, the rock is encountered neither as climbable nor as not-climbable: it only manifests itself as beautiful or ugly.  Thus it is impossible to determine in each particular case what is due to freedom and what is due to the brute being of the for-itself.  40 The given in itself in the form of resistance or aid is revealed only in the light of the pro-jecting freedom.  But the illumination organized by the pro-jecting freedom is such that in its light the in-itself is encountered as it is , i.e., as resistant or favorable—it being clear that the given’s resistance is not accepted directly as an in-itself quality of the given but only as pointing, through a free illumination and a free refraction, toward an elusive quid .  Therefore it is only in and through freedom’s free arising that the world can develop and reveal the resistances that may make the projected end impossible to achieve.  A man can encounter an obstacle only within the field of his freedom.  Better still, it is impossible to decree a priori what, in the character that some particular existent has as an obstacle, is due to the brute existent and what is due to freedom.  Something that is an obstacle for me, indeed, may not be one for someone else.  No absolute obstacle exists; rather, the obstacle reveals its coefficient of adversity through the techniques that are freely invented, freely acquired; it also reveals it as a function of the value of the end that freedom posits.  This rock will not be an obstacle if I want, at any cost, to reach the top of the mountain; it will on the contrary discourage me if I have freely set some limits to my desire to do the projected ascent.  Thus the world, through the coefficients of adversity, reveals to me the way I care about the ends I assign to myself, in such a way that I can never know if the information it gives me is about me or about it.  In addition, the given’s coefficient of adversity is never a simple relation to my freedom, as a pure nihilating bursting forth: it is a relation, illuminated by freedom, between the datum that is the rock and the datum that my freedom has to be, i.e., between the contingency that it is not and its pure facticity.  Where the desire to climb is equal, the rock will be easy to get up for this athletic ascensionist, difficult for this other person, a novice, poorly trained and with a puny body.  But, in turn, the body only reveals itself as well trained or badly trained in relation to a free choice.  It is because I am there, and I have made of myself what I am, that the rock develops a coefficient of adversity in relation to my body.  For the lawyer who has stayed in town and pleads his case, his body hidden beneath his lawyer’s robe, the rock is neither difficult nor easy to climb: it is merged within the totality of “the world” without sticking out from it any way.  And, in a sense, it is I who choose my body as puny, as I pit it against the difficulties I generate (mountain-climbing, cycling, sport).  If I have not chosen to do sport, if I stay in the towns and concern myself exclusively with business or with intellectual work, my body will not be characterized from that point of view at all.  Thus we can begin to see the paradox of freedom: there is freedom only in a situation , and there is a situation only through freedom.  Human-reality meets resistances and obstacles that it has not created everywhere, but these resistances and obstacles only have meaning in and through the free choice that human-reality is .  But to grasp the meaning of these remarks more clearly, and to reap their benefit, we should now analyze some specific examples in their light.  What we have called freedom’s “facticity” is the given that it has to be , and which it lights up with its project.  This given manifests itself in several ways, although within the absolute unity of a single illumination.  It is my place, my body, my past, my position —insofar as that is already determined by what the others indicate—and, finally, my fundamental relation to the Other.  We will examine these different structures of the situation in turn, and with specific examples.  But we must never lose sight of the fact that none of them is given on its own and that, in considering one in isolation, we are confined to making it show up against the synthetic ground of the others.  (A) My place My place is defined by the spatial order, and the particular nature of the “ thises ” which are revealed to me against the ground of the world.  Naturally, it is the place “I inhabit” (my “country” with its soil, its climate, its riches, its hydrographic and orographic configuration), but also, more simply, it is the arrangement and the order of the objects appearing to me now (a table, on the other side of the table a window, the street, and the sea) and which point to me as the very principle of their order.  It is not possible for me not to have a place, or my relation to the world would be as if from outside, and the world would no longer manifest itself any way at all, as we saw earlier.  Moreover, even though my current place may have been assigned to me by my freedom (I “came” here), I was only able to occupy it by virtue of the one I occupied before and by following paths that are traced by the objects themselves.  And this earlier place refers me to another, and this latter to another, and so on right up to the pure contingency of my place , which is to say the place which no longer refers to anything owing to me : the place assigned to me by birth.  It will really not help to explain this last place as the one that was occupied by my mother when she brought me into the world: the chain is broken; the places that my parents freely chose cannot count for anything in an explanation of my places.  And if we consider one of these in relation to my place of origin—as for example one might say “I was born in Bordeaux because my father, who was a civil servant, was given a post there” or “I was born in Tours because my grandparents owned property there and my mother took refuge close by to them when she learned, during her pregnancy, of my father’s death”—it is in order to bring out more clearly the degree to which, for me , my birth and the place it assigns to me are contingent things.  In this way to be born is, among other features, to take one’s place or rather, in accordance with what we have just said, to receive it.  And as this original place will be the basis on which I will occupy new places, according to determinate rules, this seems to present a major restriction of my freedom.  Moreover, as soon as we reflect on it, the question becomes more complicated.  The advocates of free will point out that, actually, from the standpoint of any place I occupy now, I am offered an infinite number of other places to choose from; the opponents of freedom emphasize the fact that an infinite number of places are hereby denied to me and in addition that objects present me with an aspect which I have not chosen and which excludes all the others—and they add that my place is too closely tied up with the other conditions of my existence (the diet, the climate, etc.) for it not to contribute to making me.  Between the partisans and the opponents of freedom, it seems impossible to decide.  That is because the debate has focused on the wrong questions.  In fact, if we want to raise the question correctly, we need to start out from this antinomy: human-reality initially receives its place in the midst of things—it is through human-reality that things can come to have something like a place.  Without human-reality, there would be neither space nor place—and yet this human-reality, through whom things are placed, receives its own place among things, without in any way dictating it.  To tell the truth, there is no mystery about this: but our description must start out from the antinomy, which will provide us with the exact relation between freedom and facticity.  Geometrical space, which is to say a pure reciprocity in spatial relations, is, as we saw, a pure nothingness.  The only concrete location it is possible for me to encounter is absolute extension, which is to say just that type of extension that is defined in terms of my place as the center and in which distances are measured absolutely and without reciprocity from the object to myself.  And the only absolute extension is one that unfolds from a place where I am absolutely.  No other point can be chosen as the absolute center of reference without dragging us immediately into universal relativity.  If there is an extension, within whose limits I can apprehend myself as free or not-free, which presents itself to me as a help or as a (separating) hindrance, it can only be because, before anything else, I exist my place , without choice and without necessity either, as the pure absolute fact of my being-there .  I am there: not here but there .  That is the absolute and incomprehensible fact at the origin of extension and, in consequence, of my original relations with things (with these things, rather than those ones).  It is a purely contingent fact, an absurd fact.  Only, on the other hand, this place that I am is a relation.  It is a univocal relation, of course, but it is a relation all the same.  If I am confined to existing my place, I cannot at the same time be elsewhere in order to establish this fundamental relation; I cannot even have an obscure understanding of the object in relation to which my place is determined.  I am able only to exist the internal determinations that may be called forth in me by the elusive and unthinkable objects that, unbeknownst to me, surround me.  By the same token, the very reality of absolute extension will disappear, and I lose anything resembling a place.  Moreover, I am neither free nor not-free: a pure existent, without any constraint, but without any means either of negating any constraint.  In order for something like an extension which is originally defined as my place to come into the world, and at the same time to strictly define me, it is not only necessary for me to exist my place—i.e., for me to have to be there —but it must also be possible for me not to be fully there, in order to be able to be over there, next to the object that I locate ten meters away from me and on whose basis I become acquainted with my place.  In effect, the univocal relation that defines my place is expressed as a relation between something that I am and something that I am not.  For this relation to be revealed, it must be established.  It requires therefore that I am able to perform the following operations: (1) To escape what I am and to nihilate it so that, even while I am still existed , what I am can nonetheless be revealed as the term of a relation.  This relation is immediately given, not through the pure contemplation of objects (it might be objected, if we tried to derive space from pure contemplation, that objects are given with absolute dimensions , not with absolute distances ) but in our immediate action (“he is coming over to us,” “let’s steer clear of him,” “I am running after him,” etc.), and as such it implies an understanding of what I am as being-there.  But at the same time, what I am really needs to be defined on the basis of the being-there of other thises .  As being-there, I am the person to whom someone comes running, the person who still has an hour of climbing before reaching the mountain summit, etc.  What is involved therefore when, for example, I look at the mountain summit is a movement of escape out from me accompanied by a return movement back that I perform from the standpoint of the mountain’s summit, in the direction of my being-there, in order to situate myself.  Thus I am obliged to be “what I have to be” through the very fact of escaping from it.  To define myself by my place, I need first to escape from myself, in order to posit the coordinates on whose basis I will be able to define myself more narrowly as the center of the world.  We should note that my being-there cannot determine the surpassing that establishes and situates things, since it is a pure given , unable to project, and since, moreover, in order to define oneself narrowly as this or as that being-there , the surpassing followed by the movement back must already have determined it.  (2) To escape by an internal negation the thises -in-the-midst-of-the-world that I am not, and through which I become acquainted with what I am.  As we have seen, the discovery of these and the escape from them are the outcome of one same negation.  Here, too, the internal negation is first and spontaneous in relation to the datum as what is un-covered.  We cannot allow that it induces our apprehension; but, on the contrary, for there to be any this , which acquaints the being-there that I am with its distances, what is required is precisely that I should, through pure negation, escape from it.  Nihilation, internal negation, a determining movement of return to the being-there that I am: these three operations are just one and the same.  They are only the moments of an original transcendence throwing itself toward an end by nihilating me, in order to acquaint me through the future with what I am.  Thus it is my freedom that comes to confer on me my place and to define it as such by situating me; I can only be strictly limited to this being-there that I am because my ontological structure is to not be what I am and to be what I am not.  Moreover, this determining of my location, which presupposes transcendence in its entirety, can take place only in relation to an end.  It is in the light of the end that my place acquires its meaning.  For I can never be simply there .  Rather, my place is apprehended precisely as an exile or—on the contrary—as the natural, reassuring, and favorite place that Mauriac called the querencia , in comparison with the place in the arena to which the wounded bull always returns.  41 It is in relation to what I am projecting to do—in relation to the world in its totality and, therefore, to all of my being-in-the-world—that my place can appear to me as an aid or an impediment.  To be at a place is in the first place to be far from… or near to…, which is to say that the place is endowed with a meaning in relation to a specific being that does not yet exist, and that one wishes to attain.  The place is defined by the accessibility or inaccessibility of this end.  It is therefore in the light of non-being and the future that my position can currently be understood: being-there is to be able to reach the teapot by taking just one step, to be able to dip my pen into the ink by stretching out my arm, to need to turn my back to the window if I want to read without tiring my eyes, to be obliged to mount my bicycle and put up with the exhaustion of a sweltering afternoon for two hours if I want to see my friend Pierre, to take the train and have a sleepless night if I want to see Anny.  For a colonial, being-there is to be twenty days away from France—better still, if he is a government official and waiting for his paid trip, it is to be six months and seven days away from Bordeaux or Étaples.  For a soldier, being-there is to be a hundred and ten, or a hundred and twenty, days away from his basic training.  Everywhere, the future—a pro-jected future—intervenes: it is my future life in Bordeaux, in Étaples, the soldier’s future discharge, the word “future” that I will inscribe with my ink-soaked pen; all of this signifies my place to me and makes me exist it with irritation, impatience, or nostalgia.  If on the contrary I am running away from a group of men or from public opinion, then my place is defined by the time it will take for these people to discover me at the far end of the village where I am lodging, or for them to reach this village, etc.  In this case, what presents my place to me as favorable is my isolation.  Here, to be in a place is to be sheltered.  This choice of my end slides even into relations that are purely spatial (high and low, right and left, etc.), to give them an existential meaning.  The mountain is “overwhelming” if I am still at its foot; if I am at its summit, on the contrary, it is taken up in the very project of my pride, and symbolizes the superiority I attribute to myself in relation to other men.  The position of the rivers, the distance from the sea, etc., come into play and are endowed with symbolic meaning: my place, constituted in the light of my end, reminds me symbolically in all its details, and in the connections between its parts, of this end.  We will return to this when we come to define the object and the methods of existential psychoanalysis more closely.  We can never grasp the brute relation of distance to objects outside the meanings and the symbols that make up our particular way of constituting it, especially as the brute relation itself only has meaning in relation to the choice of techniques that allow us to measure and traverse the distances.  This town, situated twenty kilometers away from my village and connected to it by a tram line, is a great deal closer to me than a rocky summit situated four kilometers away, but at an altitude of two thousand eight hundred meters.  Heidegger showed us how the places assigned to our implements by our everyday concerns have nothing in common with pure, geometric distance.  Once my spectacles are on my nose, he tells us, they are much farther away from me than the object I can see through them.  42 Thus we are obliged to say that the facticity of my place is revealed to me only in and through the free choice that I make of my end.  Freedom is indispensable to the discovery of my facticity.  Every point in the future I am pro-jecting teaches me about this facticity; it is on the basis of this chosen future that it appears to me, with its character of powerlessness, contingency, weakness, and absurdity.  It is in relation to my dream of seeing New York that the fact that I live in Mont-de-Marsan is absurd and distressing.  But, inversely, facticity is the only reality that freedom is able to encounter, the only reality it can nihilate by positing an end, the only reality on whose basis it makes any sense to posit an end.  For, if the end is able to illuminate the situation, that is because it is constituted as a projected change in that situation.  My place appears on the basis of the changes that I plan.  But to change something implies precisely that there is something to be changed—which is of course my place.  Thus freedom is the apprehension of my facticity .  It would be absolutely futile to try to define or to describe this facticity’s quid “before” freedom has turned back toward it to grasp it as a specific deficiency.  Before freedom has delimited my location as a lack of some particular kind, my place “is not,” strictly speaking, anything at all, since extension itself—on whose basis every place has to be understood—does not exist.  On the other hand, the question itself is unintelligible, because it introduces a “before” that has no meaning: it is freedom itself, in fact, which temporalizes itself, in accordance with the directions of “before” and “after.” It remains no less the case that, without this brute and unthinkable quid , freedom could not be freedom.  It is the very facticity of my freedom.  It is only in the act through which freedom has discovered facticity and apprehended it as its place that this place, thus defined, manifests itself as a hindrance to my desires, an obstacle , etc.  How otherwise would it be possible for it to be an obstacle? An obstacle to what ? A constraint on doing what ? An emigrant who, after the failure of his political party, was going to leave France to go to Argentina is said to have given this answer when someone pointed out to him that Argentina was “quite far”: “Far from what?” he asked.  And it is quite clear that, if Argentina seems “far” to those who remain in France, that is in relation to an implicit national project that valorizes their position as Frenchmen.  For the internationalist revolutionary, Argentina is a center of the world like any other country.  But if we have from the outset constituted French soil, through a first project, precisely as our absolute place—and if some catastrophe forces us into exile—it is in relation to this initial project that Argentina will appear to be “quite far,” or a “land of exile,” and that we will feel ourselves to be expatriates.  In this way freedom itself creates the obstacles that make us suffer.  It is freedom itself which in positing its end—and in choosing that end either as “inaccessible” or as “only accessible with difficulty”—makes our location appear as a resistance to our projects that is insurmountable or that can be overcome only with difficulty.  Again, it is freedom which, by establishing the spatial connections between objects—as a first type of equipmental relation—and deciding on the techniques that enable the distances to be measured and covered, constitutes its own restriction .  But precisely there can be no freedom without restraint , since freedom is choice.  Every choice, as we will see, presupposes some elimination and selection; every choice is a choice of finitude.  In this way freedom can be truly free only by constituting facticity as its own restriction.  There would therefore be no point in saying “I am not free” to go to New York, on account of my being a minor civil servant in Mont-de-Marsan.  On the contrary, it is in relation to my project to go to New York that I will situate myself in Mont-de-Marsan.  My location in the world, Mont-de-Marsan’s relationship to New York and to China, would be quite different were my project to become, for example, a wealthy farmer in Mont-de-Marsan.  In the first case Mont-de-Marsan appears against the ground of the world in an arrangement that connects it with New York, Melbourne, and Shanghai; in the second case, it emerges against an undifferentiated ground of world.  As for the real importance of my project to go to New York, I alone can decide that.  It may just be a way of choosing to be dissatisfied by Mont-de-Marsan, and in this case everything is centered around Mont-de-Marsan; I simply feel a need to constantly nihilate my place, to live in a constant state of withdrawal in relation to the city where I live—it may also be a project to which I commit myself entirely.  In the first case I will apprehend my place as an insurmountable obstacle, and I will simply have made use of a particular perspective to define it indirectly within the world; in the second case, on the contrary, the obstacles no longer exist and my place will no longer be a point of attachment but a point of departure: for, in order to go to New York, some point of departure—whichever it is—is obviously required.  Thus, at any moment whatsoever, I will apprehend myself as committed within the world, in my contingent place.  But this commitment is precisely what gives my contingent place its meaning, and what my freedom is.  Of course, in being born, I take up my place , but I am responsible for the place I take up.  Here we can see more clearly the inextricable connection between freedom and facticity within the situation, since without facticity freedom would not exist—as a power to nihilate and to choose—and, without freedom, facticity would not be uncovered and would not even have any meaning.  (B) My past We have a past.  Of course we have been able to establish that this past does not determine our acts in the way that an earlier phenomenon determines the consequent phenomenon, and of course we have shown that the past has no power to constitute the present and to sketch out the future in advance.  It remains no less the case that the freedom that escapes toward the future cannot give itself a past at whim, nor, a fortiori , can it produce itself without a past.  It has its own past to be, and this past is irremediable.  It even looks, at first sight, as if freedom is unable to change it in any way: the past is something out of reach that haunts us from a distance, without our being able even to turn back to it, to confront it and consider it.  If the past does not determine our actions, it is at least such as to make it impossible for us to make any new decision except on its basis .  If I have studied to go to the Naval College 43 and become a naval officer, whatever the moment in which I review and weigh things up for myself, I am committed; at the very instant in which I apprehend myself I am on watch, on the deck of the boat of which I am second-in-command.  Of course, I may suddenly rebel against this fact, hand in my resignation, or decide to commit suicide: these extreme measures are taken in the context of the past that is mine; if they aim to destroy it, that is because it exists and my most radical decisions cannot reach any further than my adoption of a negative position in relation to my past.  But that is, essentially, to acknowledge its immense importance as a platform and as a point of view: any action that aims to separate me from my past must in the first place be conceived on the basis of this past here , which means it must recognize, first and foremost, that it arises on the basis of this particular past that it wishes to destroy; as the proverb says, our actions follow us.  44 The past is present and merges imperceptibly into the present: it is the suit I chose six months ago, the house that was built for me, the book that I began last winter, my wife, the promises made by me to her, my children.  Everything that I am is what I have to be, in the mode of having-been-it.  Thus the importance of the past cannot be exaggerated, since for me “ Wesen ist was gewesen ist ,” to be is to have been.  45 But here we find, once again, the paradox that we pointed to earlier: I cannot conceive of myself without a past; better, I could not even think anything about myself, since I think about what I am and since I am in the past; but, on the other hand, I am the being through whom the past comes to itself, and comes into the world.  Let us examine this paradox more closely: freedom, being a choice, is a change.  It is defined by the end that it pro-jects, i.e., by the future that it has to be.  But precisely because the future is the state-that-has-not-yet-come-to-be-of-what-is, it can be conceived of only in close connection with what is.  And it cannot be what is that illuminates what has not yet come to be, because what is is a lack and in consequence can only be known as such on the basis of what is missing from it.  It is the end that illuminates what is.  But in order to seek the forth-coming end, to be acquainted by it with what one is, it is necessary to already be beyond what is, to have taken a nihilating step back that brings it clearly into view as an isolated system.  46 What is, therefore, acquires its meaning only when it is surpassed toward the future.  What is, therefore, is the past.  We can see how the past, in its capacity of “what must be changed,” is indispensable to the choice of the future—and, at the same time how, in consequence, it is impossible for any free surpassing to occur except on the basis of a past—and that, on the other hand, this very nature of being past comes to the past from the original choice of a future.  In particular, the past owes its irremediable character to my distinct choice of the future: if the past is the basis on which I conceive and project a new state of affairs in the future, it is itself what is left in place ; 47 in consequence, the past itself lies outside any perspective of change.  Thus, for it to be possible for the future to be actualized, the past must be irremediable.  I might easily not exist: but, if I exist, I cannot fail to have a past.  That is the form taken in this case by the “necessity of my contingency.” But on the other hand, as we have seen, two characteristics above all qualify the for-itself: (1) nothing is in consciousness without being consciousness of being; (2) my being is in question in my being—which means that nothing happens to me that has not been chosen .  We saw, indeed, that a past that was only past would collapse into an honorary existence in which it would lose any link with the present.  For us to “have” a past, we must maintain it in existence, through our very project toward the future.  We do not receive our past, but the necessity of our contingency implies that we are not able to not choose it.  That is what it means “to have one’s own past to be”: we can see that, considered from a purely temporal point of view, this necessity is fundamentally indistinguishable from the primary structure of freedom, which has to be a nihilation of the being that it is and which, through this very nihilation, makes it the case that there is a being that it is.  But if freedom is the choice of an end in accordance with the past, the past, conversely, is what it is only in relation to the chosen end.  There is an immutable element in the past: I had whooping cough when I was five—and an element that is as variable as it can be: the brute fact’s meaning, in relation to the totality of my being.  But as, on the other hand, the past fact is penetrated throughout by its meaning (I cannot “remember” my childhood whooping cough apart from some precise project which defines its meaning), it is in the end impossible for me to distinguish the brute immutable existence from the variable meaning that comes with it.  When I say “I had whooping cough when I was five,” a thousand pro-jects are presupposed, in particular the use of the calendar as a frame of reference for my individual existence (and therefore the taking up of an initial stance in relation to the social), a resolute belief in the stories that others tell me about my childhood (which clearly goes with a respect or affection for my parents, which constitutes its meaning), etc.  The brute fact itself is : but, apart from the testimonies of others, its date, the technical name for the illness—a set of meanings that depend on my projects—what exactly might it be ? Therefore this brute existence, even though it necessarily exists and is immutable , represents something like the ideal and unattainable goal of a systematic explication of all the meanings that a memory includes.  There is, no doubt, a “pure” matter to the memory, in the sense in which Bergson talks about pure memory, 48 but when it manifests itself it is only ever in and through a project that involves the appearance of this matter in its purity.  Now the meaning of the past depends closely on my present project.  That does not mean at all that I may vary the meaning of my previous actions according to whim but, quite to the contrary, that the fundamental project that I am decides absolutely on the meaning that the past which I have to be may have, for me and for others.  I alone, in fact, am able to decide at each moment on the impact of the past, not by debating, deliberating, and evaluating in each case the importance of such and such an earlier event but, by pro-jecting myself toward my goals, I rescue the past as well as myself and I decide on its meaning through my action.  Who will decide whether that mystical crisis at the age of fifteen “was” a pure accident of puberty or, on the contrary, the first sign of a future conversion? Me, according to the decision I may make—aged twenty, or thirty—to convert.  At one stroke, the project of conversion confers on an adolescent crisis the value of a premonition that I did not take seriously.  Who will decide whether the time I spent in prison, after a theft, was productive or regrettable? Me, according to whether I give up stealing or become hardened.  Who will decide on the educational value of a trip, or the sincerity of a vow of love, the purity of a past intention, etc.? It will be me, always according to the ends through which I light up these things.  Thus the whole of my past is there, insistent, urgent, and imperious, but I choose its meaning and the orders that it gives me through the very project of my end.  Without doubt, these commitments weigh on me, and without doubt the conjugal bond that I accepted in the past, the house that I bought and furnished last year, limit my possibilities and dictate my behavior; but this is precisely because my projects are such that I reaccept the conjugal bond, because I do not make of it a “conjugal bond that is in the past, moved on from, dead.” On the contrary, my projects—which imply my faithfulness to the commitments I have made, or the decision to lead an “honorable life” as a husband and father, etc.—necessarily illuminate my past conjugal vow and endow it with its still-present value.  Thus the urgency of the past comes from the future.  If I were suddenly—like Schlumberger’s 49 hero—to change radically my fundamental project—were I, for example, to seek to free myself from the continuity of my happiness—my earlier commitments would lose all their urgency.  They would only remain there in the way that those towers and ramparts from the Middle Ages remain, as something that nobody would deny but whose only meaning is to recall (as a stage that was passed through earlier) a civilization and a phase of political and economic existence that we have gone beyond and which are, today, perfectly dead.  It is the future that decides whether the past is living or dead.  The past is, indeed, originally a project, like my currently arising being.  And, to just the extent to which it is a project, it is an anticipation; its meaning comes from the future which it outlines in advance.  When the past slides entirely into the past, its absolute value depends on the confirmation or invalidation of the anticipations which it was.  But, precisely, it is entirely up to my current freedom whether to confirm the meaning of these anticipations by reaffirming them, which is to say by anticipating, after them, the future that they were anticipating or by invalidating them simply by anticipating another future.  In this case the past collapses like an expectation that has been disarmed and tricked; it has “no strength.” The fact is that the past gets its only strength from the future: whatever my way of living or evaluating my past, I can only do so in the light of a pro-ject of myself in the future.  Thus it is the order of my choices for the future that will determine an order in my past, and this order is not remotely chronological.  In the first place there will be the past that is still living and still confirmed: my love commitment, those business contracts, this image of myself, to which I am faithful.  Then the ambiguous past which no longer pleases me, and which I retain indirectly: for example, this suit that I am wearing—which I bought at a particular time, when I enjoyed being fashionable—displeases me now intensely and, on this account, the past in which I “chose” it is truly dead.  But, on the other hand, my current project to make savings is such that I have to go on wearing this suit, rather than acquire a different one.  In consequence it belongs to a past which is dead and alive at the same time, like those social institutions which were created for a particular purpose and have survived the regime that established them, because they have been put to purposes which are quite different, and sometimes even opposed.  The living past, the half-dead past, throwbacks, ambiguities, antinomies: the set of these layers of being-past is organized by the unity of my project.  It is through this project that the complex cross-referring system is set up, by which any fragment of my past is placed within a ranked and multifaceted structure in which, as in a work of art, each partial structure indicates, in various ways, various other partial structures and the total structure.  Furthermore, this decision in relation to the value, order, and nature of our past is, quite simply, historical choice in general.  If human societies are historical, that is not due merely to the fact that they have a past but because they take it up , as a monument .  When American capitalism decides to enter the 1914–1918 European war because it sees there an opportunity for profitable operations, it is not historical : it is merely utilitarian.  But when, in the light of its utilitarian projects, it resumes the former relations between the United States and France, and gives to these the meaning of a debt of honor owed to France by the Americans, it becomes historical and, in particular, it historializes itself through the famous phrase “Lafayette, we are here!” Needless to say, if a different vision of their interests at the time had led the United States to side with Germany, there would have been no shortage of elements from the past which could have been taken up as monumental: for example, it is possible to imagine propaganda based on the idea of “a brotherhood of blood,” which would essentially take account of the proportion of Germans who emigrated to America in the nineteenth century.  There is no point in regarding these references to the past as mere exercises in publicity: the essential point, in fact, is that they are necessary in order to command the support of the masses and, therefore, that the masses demand a political pro-ject that illuminates and justifies their past.  In addition, it goes without saying that the past is hereby created : there was the constitution of a common French-American past which signified , on the one hand, the Americans’ major economic interests and, on the other hand, the current affinities between two democratic capitalist systems.  Similarly, in around 1938, we saw younger generations, who were worried about the events that were taking shape internationally, suddenly came to view the 1918–1938 period in a new light and described it, even before the 1939 war had broken out, as the “interwar years.” Immediately, the period in question was constituted as a limited figure, surpassed and disavowed, while those who had lived through it, pro-jecting themselves toward a future in continuity with their present and immediate past, had experienced it as the beginning of an unlimited and continuous progression.  The current project, therefore, decides whether some fixed period of the past is continuous with the present or if it is a discontinuous fragment from which we are emerging, and which is moving further away.  Thus we would need a human history that had ended in order for some event—for example the storming of the Bastille—to acquire a definitive meaning.  Nobody denies, indeed, that the Bastille was stormed in 1789: that is the immutable fact.  But should we see, in this event, an inconsequential riot, a popular outburst against a half-demolished fortress which the Convention—anxious to create a past it could advertise—was able to transform into a remarkable achievement? Or should we regard it as the first demonstration of the power of the people, through which the popular force became stronger, gained in confidence, and was in a position to carry out the “October March” on Versailles? To think that we could decide on this today would be to forget that the historian is himself historical , i.e., that, in illuminating “History” in the light of his projects and those of his society, he historializes himself.  What we must say therefore is that the meaning of the social past is constantly “pending.” 50 Now, just like societies, the human person has a past that is monumental and pending .  At an early stage, the sages sensed this constant putting into question of the past, and the Greek tragedians, for example, expressed it by means of this proverb, which recurs in all their plays: “Call no man happy until he is dead.” 51 And the for-itself’s constant historialization is a constant affirmation of its freedom.  That said, we should not suppose that the past’s character as “pending” appears to the for-itself as a vague or unfinished aspect of its previous history.  On the contrary, in the same way as the for-itself’s choice—which it expresses in its own way—the past is apprehended at each moment by the for-itself as being strictly determined.  Similarly, and however their meaning may in other respects have evolved, the Arch of Titus and Trajan’s Column appear to the Roman or the tourist who looks at them as fully individualized realities.  And, in the light of the project which illuminates it, it is revealed as being wholly constraining.  Indeed, the past’s character as “pending” is not in any way miraculous; it only expresses, at the level of the pastified and the in-itself, the pro-jective and “waiting” aspect that human-reality had before it turned into the past.  It is because that human-reality was a free pro-ject, eaten into by an unpredictable freedom, that it can become “in the past” hostage to the for-itself’s subsequent projects.  The homologous character that human-reality was waiting to be given by a future freedom becomes something that it is condemned, as it pastifies itself, constantly to await.  In this way the past is indefinitely suspended because human-reality “was” and “will be” in a constant state of waiting.  And this waiting and the state of suspension only affirm freedom still more clearly as what originally constitutes them.  To say that the for-itself’s past is pending, or that its present is one of waiting, or that its future is a free project, or that it cannot be anything without having it to be, or that it is a detotalized totality, is one and the same thing.  But this precisely does not imply that there is anything undetermined about my past as it is revealed to me in the present: it merely puts into question the status of my current encounter with my past as definitive.  But just as my present awaits a confirmation or an invalidation that nothing allows us to predict, in the same way my past, which is carried along in this waiting, is precise exactly in proportion to the precision of my waiting.  But its meaning, although it is strictly individualized, depends completely on this waiting which itself depends on an absolute nothingness, i.e., a free project that does not yet exist.  My past is therefore a concrete and precise proposition which, as such , awaits ratification.  That is certainly one of the meanings that Kafka’s The Trial 52 is trying to expose, this constantly processual character of human-reality.  To be free is to be constantly in the course of freedom’s proceedings .  53 It remains the case that the past—if we stay with my current free choice—is, once this choice has determined it, an integral part and a necessary condition of my project.  An example will help us to understand.  For a soldier on “half-pay” 54 during the Restoration, his past is that of having been a hero in the retreat from Russia.  And our analysis so far allows us to understand that this past itself is a free choice of the future.  It is by choosing not to rally around Louis XVIII’s government and the new customs, by choosing to hope right to the end for the Emperor’s triumphal return, by choosing even to conspire in order to hasten this return, and to prefer half-pay to a full wage, that Napoleon’s old soldier chooses for himself the past of a hero of the Battle of Berezina.  Someone who had formed the pro-ject of rallying to the new government would certainly not have chosen the same past.  But, conversely, if he is only on half-pay, if he lives in a barely decent state of destitution, if he becomes embittered and wishes for the return of the Emperor, that is because he was a hero in the retreat from Russia.  Let us be clear: this past does not act before it is taken up and constituted, and no determinism at all is involved; but once the past of “a soldier of the Empire” is chosen , the for-itself behaves in a way that actualizes this past.  There is not even any difference between choosing this past and bringing it about through one’s behavior.  In this way, the for-itself, by trying to make his glorious past into an intersubjective reality, constitutes it in the eyes of others as an objectivity-for-the-Other (the prefects’ reports, for example, about the danger posed by these old soldiers).  Treated by others as such, he acts thenceforth to make himself worthy of a past that he has chosen in compensation for his current destitution and decline.  He is uncompromising, and loses any chance of a pension: the reason is that he “cannot” show himself unworthy of his past.  In this way, we choose our past in the light of a specific end, but thereafter it imposes itself on us and consumes us.  This is not because it has an existence by itself that is different from the existence that we have to be but simply because: (1) it is the materialization, as it is currently revealed, of the end that we are; (2) it appears in the midst of the world, for us and for the Other; it is never alone but immerses itself in the universal past and, in consequence, offers itself up to be evaluated by others.  Just as a geometer is free to generate any figure he likes but is unable to conceive of one that does not immediately maintain an infinite number of relations with other possible figures, so our free choice of ourselves, by giving rise to a specific evaluative ordering of our past, makes an infinite number of relations appear, connecting this past to the world, and to the Other.  And this infinite number of relations is presented to us as an infinite number of ways in which to act , since our past itself is appraised by us in the future.  And, to the extent that our past appears within the framework of our essential project, we are constrained to act in these ways.  To will this project is, in fact, to will this past, and to will this past is to will to bring it about by means of a thousand secondary actions.  In logical terms, the requirements of the past are hypothetical imperatives: “If you want to have such a past, act in such and such a way.” But as the first term is a concrete and categorical choice, the imperative is also itself transformed into a categorical imperative.  But since my past’s constraining power is borrowed from my free and reflective choice, and has just that amount of strength conferred by that choice on itself, it is impossible to determine a priori the constraining power of a past.  My free choice does not decide only on its content and the ordering of this content but also how closely this past adheres to where I am now.  If, within a fundamental perspective which we do not yet need to determine, one of my principal projects is to make progress , i.e., to be always, and at any cost, further along a certain path than I was the evening, or the hour, before, this progressive project will imply a series of detachments in relation to my past.  In that case the past will be something I look down at, from the height of my progress, with a kind of slightly scornful pity; it is an object of moral evaluation and judgment that is strictly passive , that exists only in order for me to be able to break away from it: “What a fool I was, then!” or “How nasty I was!” I am no longer part of it, and I no longer want to be part of it.  It is not, of course, that it has ceased to exist, but it exists only as this me that I am no longer , i.e., as this being that I have to be, as a me that I am no longer .  Its function is to be what I have chosen of myself, in order to oppose myself to that, which enables me to take my measure.  A for-itself like this will therefore choose itself without any solidarity with itself, which does not mean it abolishes its past but that it posits it in order to lack any solidarity with it, precisely in order to assert its complete freedom (what is past is a specific type of commitment in relation to the past, and a specific kind of tradition).  There are, on the contrary, some for-itselfs whose project involves a refusal of time and a close solidarity with the past.  In their desire to find some solid ground these people have, on the contrary, chosen the past as what they are , so that everything else is merely an indefinite flight, unworthy of tradition.  55 They have chosen in the first place to refuse that flight, i.e., to refuse to refuse ; in consequence, the role of the past is to demand their fidelity.  In this way we can see that the first group can confess disdainfully and easily to a mistake they have made, whereas for the others the same confession will be impossible unless they deliberately change their fundamental project; they will deploy all the bad faith in the world, and every loophole they can find, in order to avoid any dent in this faith in what is, which constitutes an essential structure of their project.  Thus, like the for-itself’s location, the past becomes integrated into the for-itself’s situation when, through its choice of the future, it confers on its past facticity a value, a hierarchical ordering, and an urgency on the basis of which it motivates its actions and its behavior.  (C) My surroundings My “surroundings” should not be confused with the place that I occupy, which we discussed earlier.  My surroundings are the implement-things that surround me, with their own coefficients of adversity and their equipmentality.  Of course, by occupying my place I am founding my discovery of my surroundings, and by changing place—an operation that, as we saw, I may freely perform—I am founding the appearance of new surroundings.  But, conversely, the surroundings can change, or be changed by others, without my having anything to do with their change.  Of course, as Bergson accurately observed in Matière et Mémoire , 56 a change in my place implies a complete change in my surroundings, whereas we would have to envisage a total and simultaneous change in my surroundings in order to talk of a change in my place—but such a global change in my surroundings is inconceivable.  But it remains no less true that my field of action is constantly traversed by objects that appear and disappear, where these events have nothing to do with me.  In general terms, the coefficient of adversity and equipmentality of a structure does not depend only on my place but on the implements’ own potentiality.  Thus I am thrown, from the moment I exist, in the midst of existences that differ from me, and whose potentialities are unfolding, for and against me.  I want to reach, by bicycle, the neighboring town as quickly as possible.  This project involves my personal ends, an assessment of my place and the town’s distance from my place, and the free adaptation of means (my efforts ) to the end I am pursuing.  But a tire bursts, the sun is too intense, the wind is blowing head-on, etc., all of which are phenomena I had not foreseen: these are my surroundings.  Of course, they manifest themselves in and through my principal project: through it, the wind can appear as a headwind or as a “good” wind; through it, the sun can reveal itself as a favorable or an inconvenient heat.  The synthetic organization of these constant “accidents” constitutes the unity of what the Germans refer to as my “ Umwelt ,” 57 and this “ Umwelt ” can be discovered only within the limits of a free project, which is to say the choice of the ends that I am.  However, it would be far too simple to allow our description to stop there.  If it is true that each object around me introduces itself within a situation that is already revealed, and that the sum of these objects cannot constitute a situation on its own, and if it is true that each implement detaches itself against the ground of a situation in the world, it remains no less the case that the sudden transformation or sudden appearance of an implement may contribute to a radical change in the situation: let my tire burst, and my distance from the neighboring town suddenly changes; now it is a distance to be counted in steps, and not in turns of the wheel.  In consequence, I may become certain that the person I want to see will already have caught their train when I get to their house, and this certainty may bring with it other decisions of mine (to return to my point of departure, to send a telegram, etc.).  I may even, if I am sure for example that I will not be able to make the deal that I had planned with this person, fall back on someone else and sign another contract.  And what if I should even abandon my attempt entirely, and be obliged to record a total failure of my project? In that case I will say that I was not able to inform Pierre in time, to reach an understanding with him, etc.  Isn’t this explicit recognition of my powerlessness the clearest acknowledgment of my freedom’s limits? No doubt, as we have seen, we should not confuse my freedom to choose with my freedom to obtain anything.  But isn’t it my choice itself which is at stake here, since the adversity of my surroundings is precisely, in many cases, what brings about the change in my project? We ought, before we get to the heart of this debate, to clarify and delimit it.  If it is possible for changes that occur in my surroundings to give rise to modifications in my projects, this can happen only with two provisos.  The first is that these changes cannot bring me to abandon my original project, which provides, on the contrary, the measure of their importance.  If in fact they are apprehended as reasons for abandoning this or that project, it can be only in the light of a more fundamental project; otherwise they could not be reasons at all, since a reason is apprehended by a motive-consciousness which is itself the free-choice of an end.  If the clouds which cover the sky can prompt me to give up my project to go on an excursion, it is because they are apprehended within a free projection, in which the excursion’s value is linked to a certain state of the sky, which takes us, step by step, to the value of an excursion in general, to my relation to nature and to the place of this relation within the set of relations that I maintain with the world.  In the second place, the object that has appeared or disappeared cannot in any case induce me to give up my project, even in part.  This object would need in fact to be apprehended as a lack within the original situation; it would be necessary therefore for the given of its appearance or its disappearance to be nihilated, for me to step back “in relation to it” and, in consequence, for me to decide on myself in its presence.  As we have already shown, even the executioner’s grip does not exempt us from being free.  That does not mean that it is always possible to get around the difficulty, to make good the damage, but simply that the impossibility itself of continuing in a certain direction must be freely constituted.  It enters into things through our free renunciation, rather than our renunciation being induced by the impossibility of the actions that were to be performed.  That said, we must acknowledge that, here too, the presence of the given, far from being an obstacle to our freedom, is called for by its very existence.  This freedom is a specific freedom that I am.  But who am I, if not a certain internal negation of the in-itself? Without this in-itself which I negate, I would vanish into nothingness.  We have pointed out, in our Introduction, that consciousness can be used as an “ontological proof” of the existence of an in-itself.  If indeed there is consciousness of something, this “something” must from the outset have a being that is real , which is to say not relative to consciousness .  But we can see now that this proof has a wider scope: if I must be able to do something in general, I must act on beings whose existence is independent of my existence in general, and particularly of my action.  My action may reveal this existence to me, but it does not condition it.  To be free is to-be-free-to-change.  Freedom therefore implies the existence of the surroundings to be changed: obstacles to be overcome, tools to be used.  Of course, it is freedom that reveals them as obstacles, but through its free choice it can only interpret the meaning of their being.  It is necessary for them to quite simply be there, wholly brute, for there to be freedom.  To be free is to-be-free-to-do and it is to-be-free-in-the-world .  But if that is the case, freedom, by recognizing itself as a freedom to change, recognizes and implicitly foresees in its original project the independent existence of the given on which it acts.  It is internal negation which reveals the in-itself as independence, and it is this independence which constitutes the in-itself in its character as a thing .  But henceforth, what freedom posits, simply through arising in its being, is that its way of being is to deal with something other than itself .  To do something is precisely to change something that has no need of anything but itself to exist; it is to act on something that is necessarily indifferent to one’s action, and able to pursue its existence or its evolution without it.  Without this indifferent externality of the in-itself, the very notion of doing something would lose its meaning (as we showed earlier, in relation to the wish and the decision) and, in consequence, freedom itself would collapse.  Thus the very project of a freedom in general is a choice which involves the expectation and acceptance of resistances that are in any case quite commonplace.  Not only does freedom constitute the framework in which in-itselfs which are in other respects indifferent will be revealed as resistances but, further, its very project, in general, is the project to do something in a resisting world, by triumphing over these resistances.  Any free project foresees, as it pro-jects itself, the margin of unpredictability due to the independence of things, precisely because it is on the basis of this independence that a freedom is constituted.  The moment I plan to go to the neighboring village to find Pierre, punctures, a headwind, a thousand predictable and unpredictable accidents, are given in my project itself and constitute its meaning.  So the unexpected puncture that interferes with my projects comes to take its place in a world that is sketched out in advance by my choice, because I have never stopped, if I can put it like this, expecting it to be unexpected .  And even if my journey was interrupted by something I had not thought of even in my wildest dreams, like a flood or a rockslide, this unpredictable event was, in a certain way, predicted: within my pro-ject a certain margin of indeterminacy was left “for the unpredictable,” just as the Romans reserved, in their temple, a place for the unknown gods—and that is not because of any experience of “bad shocks” or empirical prudence but because of the very nature of my project.  Thus we can say that, in one way, nothing surprises human-reality.  These observations allow us to bring to light a new characteristic of free choice: every one of freedom’s projects is an open project , and not a closed project.  Although it is entirely individualized, it contains within it the possibility of further modifications.  Any project involves, in its structure, an understanding of the “ Selbstständigkeit ” of the things in the world.  It is this constant prediction of the unpredictable, as the margin of indeterminacy in the project that I am, that enables me to understand that, rather than surprising me with its novelty or extraordinariness, an accident or catastrophe will always burden me with a certain “seen-this-before—expected-this” aspect, with its very obviousness and a kind of fatalistic necessity that we express with the words “that was bound to happen.” Nothing ever astonishes in the world, and nothing surprises us, unless we ourselves have determined ourselves to be astonished.  And the primary content to astonishment is not that such and such a particular thing exists within the limits of the world but rather that there is a world in general, which is to say that I am thrown among a totality of existents which are profoundly indifferent to me.  The fact is that, by choosing an end, I am choosing to have relations with these existents, and that these existents should have relations with each other; I choose that they will combine with each other in order to acquaint me with what I am.  Thus the adversity to which things bear witness is sketched out in advance by my freedom as one of its conditions, and it is on a freely projected meaning of adversity in general that this or that structure is able to manifest its individual coefficient of adversity.  But, as on every occasion where the situation is in question, we must emphasize the fact that there is a reverse side to the described state of affairs: if freedom sketches out in advance adversity in general, it does so in a way that confirms the in-itself’s indifferent externality.  No doubt adversity arrives in things through freedom, but it does so to the degree to which freedom illuminates its facticity as “being-in-the-midst-of-an-indifferent-in-itself.” Freedom presents things to itself as adverse, i.e., it confers a meaning on them which makes them into things; but it is by accepting the given itself that the given will be meaningful, i.e., by accepting one’s exile, in order to surpass it, in the midst of an indifferent in-itself.  In addition, and conversely, the contingent given that is accepted can support this primary meaning, which supports all the other meanings—“exile in the midst of indifference”—only in and through a free acceptance of the for-itself.  That indeed is the situation’s basic structure, appearing here with the utmost clarity: it is through its very surpassing of the given toward its ends that freedom makes the given exist as this given here —before it there was no “this,” no “that,” and no “here”—and the given that is thereby designated does not take just any form but is a brute existent that is accepted in order to be surpassed.  But at the same time as freedom surpasses this given here , it chooses itself as this surpassing here of the given.  Freedom is not just any surpassing of any old given but, by taking on the brute given and conferring its meaning on it, it has by the same token chosen itself: its end is precisely to change this given here , even while the given appears as this given here in the light of the chosen end.  In this way freedom arises as the crystallization of an end through a given , and as the discovery of a given in the light of an end: these two structures are simultaneous and inseparable.  Later on, in fact, we will see that the universal values of the chosen ends can be brought out only through analysis; every choice is the choice of a concrete change to be made to a concrete given.  Every situation is concrete.  Thus the adversity of things and their potentialities are in general illuminated by the chosen end.  But an end can exist only for a for-itself who accepts himself as abandoned in the midst of indifference.  Through this acceptance, he adds nothing new to this contingent and brute abandonment, apart from a meaning : he makes it the case that from now on there is a state of abandonment; he makes it the case that this abandonment is disclosed as a situation.  In Part Two, Chapter 4, we saw that the for-itself, by arising, brings the in-itself to the world; 58 in a still more general way, the for-itself was the nothingness through which “there was” any in-itself, i.e., things.  We saw, too, that in-itself reality lies there, close at hand, with its qualities , without distortion or addition.  Only, we are separated from it by the various categories of nihilation that we establish by our very arising: the world, space and time, potentialities.  We saw, in particular, that although we are surrounded by presences (this glass, this inkwell, this table, etc.), it is not possible to grasp these presences as such, because they can only deliver up anything of themselves from the other side of a movement or an action that is pro-jected by us, i.e., in the future.  We are now able to understand the meaning of this state of affairs: nothing separates us from things except our freedom .  It is because of freedom that there can be things—with all their indifference, unpredictability, and adversity—and that we are inescapably separated from them, because it is against the ground of nihilation that these things appear and are revealed as being connected with each other.  Thus my freedom’s project adds nothing to things: it makes it the case that there are things (which is to say, precisely, realities that are characterized by a coefficient of adversity and usability); it makes it the case that things are encountered in experience (which is to say that they successively detach themselves against the ground of the world, in the course of a process of temporalization); finally, it makes it the case that things manifest themselves as being out of reach, independent, separated from me by the very nothingness that I am secreting and that I am.  It is because freedom is condemned to be free—i.e., because it can choose itself only as freedom 59 —that there are things, i.e., a plenitude of contingency, at the heart of which freedom is itself contingent.  It is through my accepting and surpassing of this contingency that it is possible for there to be a choice and at the same time for things to be organized in a situation .  And it is the contingency of freedom and the contingency of the in-itself that are expressed in situation through the unpredictability and adversity of my surroundings.  Thus I am absolutely free, and responsible for my situation.  But in addition I am only ever free in situation .  (D) My fellow man To live in a world haunted by my fellow man is not only to be able to encounter the other at every turn of the road but also to find myself committed within a world whose structures of equipment may have a meaning that does not come in the first place from my free project.  And it is also, in the midst of this world that is already endowed with a meaning, to have to deal with a meaning that is mine and that I did not give to myself either, a meaning that I discover myself “already to possess.” When therefore we ask what is implied for our “situation” by the original and contingent fact of our existing in a world in which “there are” also others, this way of formulating the problem requires us to study in turn three layers of reality which enter into the constitution of my concrete situation: the implements that are already meaningful (the station, the railway timetable, the artwork, the poster that mobilizes the army); the meaning that I discover as already mine (my nationality, my race, my physical appearance); and, last, the other as the center of reference indicated by these meanings.  Indeed, everything would be quite simple if I belonged to a world whose meanings were uncovered only in the light of my own ends.  I really would be able to position things as implements or structures of equipment within the limits of my own choice of myself; that choice would make of the mountain a difficult obstacle to overcome, or a point of view over the countryside, etc.; the problem of knowing the mountain’s meaning in itself would not arise, since I am the one who brings meanings to reality in itself.  The problem would also be far simpler if I were a monad without doors or windows and if I merely knew, in some way or other, that other monads existed or were possible, each of which was conferring new meanings on the things I can see.  In that case (which is the one to whose examination philosophers have too often confined themselves), it would suffice for me to regard other meanings as possible ; and in the end, since the plurality of meanings corresponds to the plurality of consciousnesses, this would be equivalent to the possibility, constantly open to me, of making another choice of myself.  But we saw that this monadic conception harbors a hidden solipsism, precisely because it tends to conflate the plurality of meanings that I can attach to reality with the plurality of signifying systems, each of which refers back to a consciousness that I am not.  And besides, this monadic description shows itself to be inadequate for the domain of concrete experience; there is, in fact, something to “my” experience other than a plurality of possible experiences; objective meanings exist that present themselves to me as not having been brought to light by myself.  I, through whom meanings arrive in things, find myself committed within a world that is already meaningful and which reflects back to me meanings that I did not put there.  Consider, for example, the countless meanings, independent of my choice, that I encounter if I live in a town: streets, houses, shops, trams and buses, signposts, the sounds of car horns, wireless music, etc.  If I were alone, of course, I would encounter the existent as brute and unpredictable— this rock, for example—and I would confine myself, in short, to making it the case that there was a rock, which is to say this existent here and nothing outside it.  But I would at the least be conferring on it the meaning of something “to climb,” “to avoid,” “to contemplate,” etc.  When I encounter a house at a bend in the road I do not reveal only a brute existent within the world; I do not make it the case only that there is a “this,” characterized in such and such a way.  Rather, the meaning of the object revealed to me here resists and remains independent of me: I discover that the building is an apartment building or the offices of the Compagnie du Gaz, or a prison, etc.  Here the meaning is contingent, and independent of my choice, and it is presented with the same indifference as the in-itself’s reality: it has become a thing and cannot be distinguished from the in-itself’s quality .  In the same way, I encounter things’ coefficient of adversity before I experience it; a host of notices warn me: “Slow down, dangerous bend,” “Attention! School,” “Danger of death,” “100m to Cassis,” etc.  But the fact that these meanings are deeply inscribed in things and share their indifferent externality—at least in appearance—does not make them any less indicative of a mode of behavior to be adopted that concerns me directly.  I will use the pedestrian crossing, I will go into this shop to buy this implement, for which the instructions are very precisely laid out in a leaflet that is given to the customer, and then I will use this implement—a fountain pen, for example—to fill in such and such a form, in a particular set of conditions.  Do I not discover here some narrow limits to my freedom? If I do not follow, step by step, the directions that others give me, I will no longer be able to find my way; I will take the wrong street, miss my train, etc.  Moreover, these directions are for the most part imperatives: “Enter that way,” “Leave that way”; that is what the words “Entrance” and “Exit,” painted above the doors, signify.  I submit to these directions: to the coefficient of adversity in things that is engendered by me, they add a coefficient of adversity that is strictly human.  In addition, if I submit to this structure, I depend on it: the benefits it provides me with may dry up; it only takes some civil unrest, or a war, and suddenly the most essential products become scarce, whether I like it or not.  I am dispossessed, halted in my plans, deprived of what is necessary to achieve my ends.  And, in particular, we noted that instructions, labels, orders, prohibitions, and nameplates are addressed to me insofar as I am just anybody ; to the extent that I obey, that I place myself within the network, I submit to the goals of any old human-reality and I bring them about by any old technique.  I am therefore changed in my own being, since I am the ends I have chosen and the techniques by which they are actualized: any old ends, any old techniques, any old human-reality.  At the same time, since the world only ever appears to me through the techniques that I use, the world is also changed.  This world, seen through the use that I make of the bicycle, the car, or the train to travel through it, shows me a face that is strictly correlative to the means I am using—the face, therefore, that it offers to everyone .  It must obviously follow—it might be said—that my freedom escapes me from all sides: there is no longer a situation , in the shape of a meaningful world that is structured around the free choice of my spontaneity; there is a state that is imposed on me.  This is what we ought to examine now.  It is beyond doubt that my membership of an inhabited world has the status of a fact .  It is connected, indeed, to the original fact of the Other’s presence in the world, a fact that, as we saw, cannot be deduced from the for-itself’s ontological structure.  And although this fact only drives deeper the roots of our facticity, it does not derive from our facticity either, insofar as this latter translates the necessity of the for-itself’s contingency.  What we should say, instead, is that the for-itself exists de facto , i.e., that its existence cannot be equated either to a reality that is generated in accordance with a law, or to a free choice, and that among the de facto characteristics of this “facticity”—i.e., among those characteristics that can be neither deduced nor proved but that can simply “be seen”—there is one that we call existence-in-the-world-in-the-presence-of-others.  Whether or not my freedom has to take up this de facto characteristic in order for it to be effective in any way is something that we will discuss a little later.  It remains no less the case that, with respect to the techniques for appropriating the world, the fact of the collective ownership of the techniques is the consequence of the very fact of the other’s existence.  At this level, therefore, facticity shows itself through the fact of my appearing in a world that is revealed to me only through techniques that are collective and already constituted, which aim to make me grasp it in a way whose meaning has been defined outside me.  These techniques will determine my membership of communities: of the human species , the national community, the professional and familial group.  But as we must emphasize, apart from my being-for-the-Other (to be discussed later), the only positive way in which I can exist my de facto membership of these communities is the use that I constantly make of the techniques associated with them.  Indeed, membership of the human species is defined by the use of some very elementary and very general techniques: to know how to walk, how to pick something up, how to judge the relief and the relative size of perceived objects, how to talk, how to distinguish, in general, between the true and the false, etc.  But we do not possess these techniques in this abstract and universal form: to know how to speak is not to know how to say and to understand words in general; it is to know how to speak a specific language and thereby to manifest one’s membership of humankind at the level of the national community.  Besides, to know how to speak a language is not to have an abstract and pure knowledge of the language, as it is defined by dictionaries and academic grammars: it is to make it one’s own through the distortions and selections of one’s province, profession, and family.  In this way we can say that the reality of our membership among humans is our nationality and that the reality of our nationality is our membership of our family, region, profession, etc.—in the sense in which the reality of language is some particular language and the reality of that language is its dialect, slang, patois, etc.  And, conversely, the truth of a dialect is the particular language, and the truth of that language is language in general: this means that we are referred by the concrete techniques through which our membership of a family or a locality is manifested to more abstract and general structures that constitute something like their meaning and their essence, and these refer to others, still more general, until we get to the universal and perfectly simple essence of any old technique, through which any old being appropriates the world.  Thus, to be French, for example, is only the truth of being a Savoyard.  But to be a Savoyard is not simply to live in the high valleys of Savoy: it is, among a thousand other things, to ski in the winter, and to use skiing as a mode of transport.  And, more precisely, it is to ski according to the French method, not the method that is used in the Arlberg region, or by Norwegians.  60 But, since the mountain and the snowy slopes can be grasped only through a technique, that is precisely to discover the French meaning of ski slopes.  Indeed, depending on whether one uses the Norwegian method, which is more suitable for gentle slopes, or the French method, which is more suitable for hard slopes, the same slope will seem to be gentler or harder in exactly the way that a hill will seem more or less hard to the cyclist depending on whether he has “used a low or a medium gear.” 61 In this way the French skier makes use of a French “gear” to go down the skiing area and, wherever he is, this gear discloses a particular type of slope to him—which is to say that the Swiss or Bavarian Alps, the regions of Telemark or the Jura, will always offer him a meaning, difficulties, a structure of equipmentality or of adversity that is purely French.  Similarly, it would be easy to show that most attempts at defining the working class take as their criterion either production, consumption, or a certain kind of “ Weltanschauung ” associated with the inferiority complex (Marx, Halbwachs, de Man), 62 i.e., in every case, certain techniques for elaborating or appropriating the world, through which it offers what we might call its “proletarian face,” with its violent contradictions, its massive uniform areas of desert, its zones of darkness and its areas of light, the simple and urgent ends that illuminate it.  Now, it is evident—even though my membership of such and such a class or such and such a nation does not derive from my facticity, as the ontological structure of my for-itself—that my de facto existence, i.e., my birth and my place, brings in its wake my way of apprehending the world and myself through certain techniques.  Now, these techniques, which I have not chosen, are what give the world its meanings.  I am no longer the one, it seems, who decides on the basis of my ends whether the world will appear to me with the simple and clear-cut oppositions of the “proletarian” universe or with the innumerable and complicated nuances of the “bourgeois” world.  I am not only thrown in the face of the brute existent; I am thrown into a world that is working-class, French, with the character of Lorraine or of the South, and which offers me its meanings when I have done nothing to reveal them.  Let us take a closer look.  We showed just now that my nationality was only the truth of my membership of a province, a family, a professional grouping.  But should we stop there? If the language is only the truth of the dialect, is the dialect the reality which is absolutely concrete? Is the jargon of a profession, in the way in which “one” speaks it, or the Alsatian patois—whose rules it has been possible to determine by a linguistic and statistical study—the primary phenomenon, the one that is founded in pure fact, in original contingency? Linguists’ investigations can mislead us here: their statistics bring to light the constants, the phonetic or semantic distortions of a given type; they allow us to reconstitute the evolution of a phoneme or a morpheme within a given period in such a way as to make it seem that the word or the syntactic rule has an individual reality, with its own meaning and history.  And in fact individuals appear to have little influence on the evolution of language.  Social facts such as invasions, the main lines of communication, and commercial relations seem to be the essential causes of linguistic changes.  But that is because we have not taken up a genuinely concrete standpoint, and so we are given no more than what we sought.  For a long time psychologists have been pointing out that the material element in language is not the word , not even the word in a dialect, or the word used in a family, with its particular distortions; the elementary structure of language is the sentence .  Indeed it is from within the sentence that the word can acquire a real referential function; outside it, when it is not quite simply an inscription whose aim is to group together meanings that are wholly disparate, it is merely a propositional function.  Where it appears on its own in speech, it has a “holophrastic” quality that has often been emphasized; this does not mean that, by itself, we can limit it to one precise meaning, but that it is integrated within a context, as a secondary figure within a principal figure.  Outside the complex and active structures in which it is included, therefore, the word has only a purely virtual existence.  It cannot therefore exist “in” a consciousness or an unconscious before the use that is made of it: the sentence is not made of words .  We should not stop at that: Paulhan showed in Les Fleurs de Tarbes that there are entire sentences, “commonplaces,” which, just like words, do not preexist the use that is made of them.  63 These sentences that are commonplace expressions when they are considered from the outside by the reader—who reconstructs the meaning as he moves from one sentence to the next—lose their banal and conventional character if we take up the point of view of the author, who, for his part, was able to see the thing to be expressed and was pursuing what was most urgent, producing an act of reference or recreation without lingering over the actual elements of this act.  If that is how things are, neither words, nor syntax, nor “ready-made sentences” preexist the use that is made of them.  Taking the verbal unit to be the meaningful sentence, we should see this as a constructive act that can be conceived only by a transcendence that surpasses and nihilates the given toward an end.  To understand a word in the light of the sentence is very exactly to understand any given whatsoever on the basis of the situation, and to understand the situation in the light of original ends.  To understand one of my interlocutor’s sentences is indeed to understand what he “ wants to say ,” 64 which is to say to embrace his movement of transcendence, to throw myself alongside him toward possibles, toward ends, and then to return to the set of organized means in order to understand them through their function and their goal.  Besides, spoken language is always deciphered on the basis of the situation.  References to the weather, the time, the place, the surroundings, the situation of the town, the province, and the country are given before speaking begins.  It is enough for me to have read the newspapers and to see that Pierre looks well 65 and has a worried manner for me to understand the “Things are not going well” with which he approaches me this morning.  It is not his health that is “not going well,” since he has a good color, nor is it his finances, nor his household: it is the situation in our town or our country.  I already knew that : in asking “How are you?” I was already drafting my interpretation of his answer; I was already heading toward the four corners of the earth, ready to come back from them to Pierre in order to understand him.  In listening to someone speaking, we are “speaking to” him, not simply because we mime in order to decipher but because we project ourselves from the outset toward possibles, and our understanding has to be on the basis of the world .  But if the sentence preexists the word, we are directed to the speaker as the concrete foundation of speech.  If we fish a word out of sentences from various periods, it may really seem as if it is “living” by itself; this borrowed life resembles that of the knife in fantasy films that can plant itself into the pear; it is made out of the juxtaposition of instants; it is cinematic, and constituted within universal time.  But if the words seem to be living when we project our semantic or the morphological film, they do not go so far as to constitute sentences; they are only traces of the passing sentences, just as roads are only traces of the passage of pilgrims or processions.  The sentence is a project that can be interpreted only on the basis of the nihilation of something given (the very given that is designated ) and on the basis of a posited end (its designation , which itself presupposes other ends in relation to which it is only a means).  If the sentence cannot be determined by the given, any more than by the word, but, on the contrary, the sentence is necessary in order to light up the given and to understand the word, the sentence is a moment of the free choice of myself, and it is as such that my interlocutor understands it.  If a particular language is the reality of language in general, if the dialect or slang is the reality of the particular language, the reality of the dialect is the free act of designation through which I choose myself as designating .  And this free act cannot be an assemblage of words.  Of course, if it were purely an assemblage of words conforming to technical formulas (the laws of grammar), we could talk about factual limits that are imposed on the speaker’s freedom; these limits would show up in the material and phonetic nature of the words, the vocabulary of the language that is being used, the speaker’s personal vocabulary (the n words at his disposal), the “individual character of the language,” etc.  But we have just shown that it is not like that.  It has been claimed, recently, 66 that something like a living order of words exists, dynamic laws of language, an impersonal life of the logos or, in short, that language is a nature and that, in order to be able to make use of it in certain respects, man needs to serve it, as he does with Nature.  But that is because language is being considered once it is dead , which is to say once it has been spoken —by breathing into it an impersonal life and a force, affinities, and aversions, that have in fact been borrowed from the personal freedom of the speaking for-itself.  Language has been made into a language that speaks itself on its own .  That is just the mistake that we should not make, with respect to language as with all other techniques .  If we make man arise in the midst of techniques that can be applied on their own, of a language that can speak itself, a science that can make itself, a town that can build itself according to its own laws—if we freeze meanings into in-itself, even while retaining for them a human transcendence—we will reduce man’s role to that of a pilot, making use of the determined forces of the wind, the waves, the tides, in order to steer a ship.  But step by step each technique, in order to be directed toward human ends, will require another technique: for example, to manage a boat, one must speak.  By this means we will perhaps arrive at the technique of techniques—which, in its turn will apply itself on its own—but we have lost forever any possibility of meeting the technician.  If, completely to the contrary, it is by speaking that we make it the case that there are words, we are not thereby abolishing the necessary and technical connections or the de facto connections that are organized within the sentence.  Better still, we give this necessity a foundation .  But, precisely in order for it to appear, in order for the words to maintain relations between themselves, for each of them to attract—or to push away—the others, they must be united within a synthesis that is not owed to them.  Eliminate that synthetic unity, and the block of “language” will crumble; each word will return to its solitude, and at the same time lose its unity, by becoming torn between various incommunicable meanings.  Thus it is within the free project of the sentence that the laws of the language are organized; grammar is made as I speak; freedom is the only possible foundation of the laws of the language.  Besides, for whom do the laws of grammar exist? Paulhan gave us the materials for an answer: it is not for the person who speaks but for the person who listens.  The person speaking is only the choice of a meaning , and he grasps the order of his words only insofar as he makes it .  67 The only relationships that he will be able to grasp within this structured whole are specifically the ones that he has established.  If, later on, we discover that two—or several—words maintain not one but several precise relations with each other and that the result is a multiplicity of meanings for a single sentence that can be ranked or opposed to each other—if, in short, we discover “the Devil’s share” 68 —it can only be under the following two conditions: (1) the words must have been gathered and presented by a free and meaningful act of bringing them together; (2) this synthesis must be viewed from outside, i.e., by the Other and in the course of a hypothetical deciphering of the possible meanings of this combination.  In that case, indeed, each word that is apprehended first as an intersection of meanings is linked to another word that is, equally, apprehended in that way.  And the combination will be multivocal .  The grasp of the true meaning—i.e., the meaning deliberately intended by the speaker—may throw the other meanings into the shadows or subordinate them to it; it will not eliminate them.  In this way, language, a free project for me , has specific laws for the other .  And these laws themselves can only operate within an original synthesis.  We can appreciate therefore all the difference that separates the event of a “sentence” from a natural event.  A fact of nature comes about in conformity with a law that it manifests, but this law is a pure, external rule of production, of which the fact we are considering is just one example.  The “sentence” as an event contains the law of its organization within itself, and it is within the free project of designating that it is possible for lawful relations between the words to arise.  Indeed, there cannot be any laws governing speech before someone speaks.  And every word is a free project of designation, flowing from the personal for-itself’s choice, and needing to be interpreted on the basis of this for-itself’s global situation.  What comes first is the situation, on the basis of which I understand the meaning of this sentence, where this meaning is in itself not to be regarded as a given but as an end that is chosen in a free surpassing of the means.  That is the only reality that the linguist’s work can encounter.  On the basis of this reality, the application of regressive analysis may bring certain more general, simpler structures to light which are something like lawful schemata.  But these schemata, which may, for example, be equivalent to the dialect’s laws, are in themselves abstract.  Far from presiding over the constitution of the sentence, and being the mold into which it is poured, they exist only in and through this sentence.  In this sense, the sentence appears to be like a free invention of its laws.  What we rediscover here, quite simply, is the original characteristic of every situation: it is specifically through its free surpassing of the given as such (the linguistic apparatus) that the free project of the sentence can make the given appear as this given (with these laws of the arrangement and pronunciation of the dialect).  But the free project of the sentence is precisely the intention to take up this given here ; it does not take up just any old thing but targets an end that does not yet exist, through existing means on which it confers precisely their meaning as means.  In this way the sentence is an arrangement of words that become these words only through that arrangement itself.  This is exactly what the linguists and psychologists sensed, and we can use their confusion here as something against which to check our view: in fact they believed they had found a circle in the elaboration of speech because, in order to speak, one must know one’s thought.  But how can we know this thought, as a reality that is explicated and set down in concepts, if not precisely by speaking it? Thus language refers us to thought, and thought to language.  But we are able now to understand that there is no circle or, rather, that this circle—from which, it was thought, we could get out by inventing pure psychological idols, such as the verbal image, or the wordless and imageless thought—is not peculiar to language: it characterizes the situation in general.  It does not mean anything other than the ecstatic connection of the present, the future, and the past, i.e., the free determination of the existent by the not-yet-existing and of the not-yet-existing by the existent.  Thereafter we may discover abstract operative schemata which represent something like the lawful truth of the sentence: the dialectical schema, the schema of the national language, the schema for language in general.  But these schemata, far from preexisting the concrete sentence, are themselves affected by Unselbstständigkeit and only ever exist as they are embodied and maintained in their very embodiment by a freedom.  Here, of course, language is only the example of a social and universal technique.  The same would hold for every other technique: it is the chop of the axe that reveals the axe, the hammering that reveals the hammer.  We will be able to detect, in a particular excursion, the French method of skiing and within this method the general art of skiing as a human possibility.  But this human art is never anything by itself: it exists only in potentiality ; it is embodied and manifested in the actual and particular art of the skier.  This enables us to sketch out a solution to the individual’s relation to the species.  Without the human species there would be no truth, that is clear; all that would be left would be an irrational and contingent abundance of individual choices, to which no law could be assigned.  If something like a truth exists, and is capable of unifying individual choices, it is the human species that can provide us with it.  But if the species is the truth of the individual, it cannot be a given within the individual without a deep contradiction.  Just as the laws of language are upheld and embodied through the free concrete project of the sentence, so the human species—as the set of techniques by which men’s activity can be defined—far from preexisting the individual, who would then demonstrate it, in the way that some particular fall exemplifies the law of falling bodies, is the set of abstract relations that the free individual choice upholds.  In order to choose itself as a person, the for-itself makes it the case that an internal organization exists, which he surpasses toward himself, and this internal technical organization is the national or the human in him.  69 Very well, we will be told.  But you have evaded the problem, because the for-itself has not created these linguistic or technical structures to communicate with itself: the for-itself took them up from others.  I agree: the rule for the agreement of participles does not exist outside anyone’s free combining together of some specific participles for the purpose of some particular designation.  But when I make use of this rule that I have learned from others, it is because others are making it exist in their personal projects that I use it myself.  My language is therefore subordinate to the Other’s language and, in the end, to the national language.  We do not mean to deny this.  Neither is it our concern to show the for-itself to be the free foundation of its being: the for-itself is free, but in a condition , and it is this relation between its condition and its freedom that we are trying to clarify as the “situation.” What we have just established is in fact only a part of the reality.  We have shown that the existence of meanings that do not emanate from the for-itself cannot constitute an external limit to its freedom.  The for-itself is not in the first place a man, in order subsequently to be “himself,” and does not constitute himself as himself on the basis of an essence of man that is given a priori .  Rather, and completely to the contrary, it is in order to choose himself as a personal self that the for-itself maintains particular social and abstract characteristics in existence, which make him into a man ; and the necessary connections that accord with the elements of man’s essence appear only on the foundation of a free choice.  In this sense, each for-itself is responsible in his being for the existence of a human species.  But we still need to elucidate the undeniable fact that the for-itself can only choose himself from a point beyond specific meanings of which he is not the origin.  Each for-itself, in effect, can be for-itself only by choosing himself beyond his nationality and species—just as the for-itself can speak only by choosing what he will designate beyond syntax and morphemes.  This “beyond” is enough to assure the for-itself’s complete independence in relation to the structures that he surpasses, but it remains no less true that the for-itself constitutes himself as a “beyond” in relation to these structures here .  What does that mean? That the world in which the for-itself arises is a world for other for-itselfs.  That is what is given .  And through that very fact, as we saw, the meaning of the world is alienated from him.  This means that the for-itself finds himself in the presence of meanings that do not enter the world through him.  The for-itself arises within a world that is given to him as having been already looked at , traversed, explored, and worked on from all sides, and whose very texture has already been defined by these investigations.  And in the very act through which the for-itself unfolds his time, he temporalizes himself within a world whose temporal meaning is already defined by other temporalizations: that is the fact of simultaneity.  There is no question here of a limit to freedom but, rather, it is in that world there that the for-itself must be free; it is in taking account of these circumstances—and not ad libitum —that the for-itself must choose himself.  But on the other hand, in arising, the for-itself does not undergo the other’s existence; he is obliged to demonstrate it to himself, in the form of a choice.  For it is through a choice that he will grasp the other as a subject-other or object-other.  70 For as long as the other is for him a looking-other, there can be no question of foreign techniques or meanings; the for-itself experiences himself as an object in the Universe, beneath the other’s look.  But the moment the for-itself, by surpassing the other toward his ends, makes the other into a transcended-transcendence, what was a free surpassing of the given comes to appear as a meaningful mode of behavior, given within the world (frozen into in-itself).  The object-other becomes an indicator of ends and, through its free project, the for-itself throws himself into a world where object-undertakings refer to ends.  In this way the other’s presence as a transcended transcendence reveals structures of means to ends that are given .  And, as the end decides on the means, and the means decide on the end, the for-itself, in arising before the object-Other, finds himself pointed toward ends within the world; he enters a world that is populated by ends.  But if techniques and their ends arise in this way before the for-itself’s gaze, we must be clear that it is through the for-itself’s free taking up of his position in the face of the other that they become some techniques .  On his own, the other cannot make his projects reveal themselves to the for-itself as techniques and, consequently, for the other , insofar as the for-itself transcends himself toward his possibles, no technique exists but rather a concrete doing that is determined on the basis of its individual end.  The cobbler who resoles a shoe does not feel himself to be “in the process of applying a technique”; he grasps the situation as requiring such and such an action, this piece of leather there as calling for a nail, etc.  The for-itself makes techniques arise within the world as ways in which the other behaves insofar as he is a transcended-transcendence , the moment he takes up a position in relation to the other.  It is at that moment and only then that the bourgeois and the workers, the French and Germans and, finally, men appear within the world.  In this way the for-itself is responsible for the fact that the other’s behavior is revealed within the world in the form of techniques.  The for-itself cannot make the world in which he arises be traversed by this or that technique (he cannot make the world in which he appears be “capitalist” or “ruled by a natural economy,” or in a “parasitic civilization”), but he makes it the case that what the other lives as a free project has an existence outside as a technique, precisely by being the one through whom the other comes to have an outside.  In this way, it is in choosing and historializing himself that the for-itself historializes the world itself, and makes it dated by his techniques.  Thereafter, precisely because the techniques appear as objects, the for-itself is able to choose to appropriate them.  In arising within a world in which Pierre and Paul speak in a particular way, and drive or cycle on the right, etc., and by constituting these free modes of behavior into meaningful objects, the for-itself makes it the case that there is a world where one shakes with one’s right hand, one speaks French, etc.; 71 it makes it the case that the internal laws of the other’s act, which were founded and maintained by a freedom committed within a project, become the objective rules of the behavior-object and that these rules become universally applicable for any analogous behavior, and for that matter become the support of any old behavior or agent-object.  This historialization, the effect of its free choice, does not in any way restrict its freedom but, quite the opposite, it is in that world there and in no other that its freedom comes into play; it is in relation to its existence in that world there that it puts itself into question.  That is because to be free is not to choose the historical world in which one arises—which would make no sense—but to choose oneself within the world, whichever it is.  In this sense, it would be absurd to suppose that a specific technical state might restrict human possibilities.  Of course, a contemporary of Duns Scotus will not know about the use of automobiles or airplanes, but he only appears as not knowing this from the point of view that is ours , from which we apprehend it privatively, on the basis of a world in which the automobile and airplane exist.  For him, as someone with no relation of any kind to these objects and the techniques that refer to them, there is at this point something like an absolute nothingness, unthinkable and undetectable.  A nothingness like this could in no way limit the for-itself who chooses himself: however one looks at it, it cannot be grasped as a lack.  Therefore a for-itself who historializes himself in Duns Scotus’s time nihilates itself at the heart of a plenum of being, i.e., within a world that is, like ours, all that it can be .  It would be absurd to assert that the Albigensians lacked any heavy artillery with which to resist Simon de Montfort, because the Trencavel noble and the Count of Toulouse chose themselves to be as they were within a world where artillery had no place: it was in that world there that they considered their strategy, and they planned their military resistance in that world; they chose themselves as supporters of the Cathars in that world .  And as they were only what they chose to be, they were absolutely within a world that was just as absolutely full as the world of the Panzerdivisionen 72 or the RAF.  What is true for techniques which are as material as these ones also holds true of subtler techniques: the fact of existing as a minor feudal lord in Languedoc in the time of Raymond VI is not a determinant if we place ourselves within the feudal world in which this lord exists and chooses himself.  It only appears as privative if we make the mistake of looking at this division between Francia and the Midi from the current viewpoint of the unity of France.  The feudal world offered the lord who was Raymond VI’s vassal an infinite number of possibilities to choose; we do not possess a greater number.  A question as absurd as this is often asked in a kind of utopian dream: what would Descartes have been if he had known about contemporary physics? That supposes that Descartes has an a priori nature which is more or less delimited and altered by the state of science in his time, and that we can transport this brute nature into the contemporary age, in which it would react to a wider and more precise body of knowledge.  But that is to forget that Descartes is who he chose to be, that he is an absolute choice of himself on the basis of a world with knowledge and techniques that this choice takes up and illuminates at the same time.  Descartes is an absolute, in possession of an absolute date, and is wholly unthinkable at another date, because he made his date in making himself.  He is the one, and not someone else, who determined the exact state of mathematical knowledge immediately before him, not through an empty inventory that might have been done from any point of view and in relation to any axes of coordinates but by establishing the principles of analytical geometry, i.e., by inventing precisely the axes of coordinates that enabled the state of this knowledge to be defined.  Here again, it is free discovery and the future that allow us to throw light on the present; the perfecting of the technique, with a view to an end, is what allows us to assess the state of the technique.  In this way, when the for-itself asserts itself in the face of the object-other, it discovers techniques at the same time.  From that moment it can appropriate them, i.e., it can internalize them.  But it follows that: (1) by using a technique, the for-itself surpasses it toward its end, and is always beyond the technique that it uses; (2) by virtue of being internalized, the technique, which was purely the signifying and frozen behavior of any old object-other, loses its character as a technique, and becomes straightforwardly included within the free surpassing of the given toward the ends; it is taken up and maintained by the freedom that founds it, in just the way in which a dialect or language is maintained by the free project of a sentence.  The feudal system, as a technical relation between men, does not exist; it is only a pure abstraction, maintained and surpassed through the thousand projects of some liege man in relation to his lord.  By this, we do not mean at all to arrive at a kind of historical nominalism.  We do not want to say that the feudal system is the sum of relations between the vassals and liege lords.  On the contrary, we believe that it is the abstract structure of these relations; for a man of this time, any project must be actualized as the surpassing toward the concrete of this abstract moment.  It is not therefore necessary to generalize on the basis of innumerable individual experiences in order to establish the principles of feudal technique: this technique exists necessarily and completely within each individual behavior, and it can in each case be brought to light.  But it is there only in order to be surpassed.  In the same way, the for-itself cannot be a person—which is to say to choose the ends which it is—without being a man, the member of a national community, a class, a family, etc.  But these are abstract structures that are maintained and surpassed through its project.  The for-itself makes itself French, from the South, in order to be himself at the horizon of these determinations.  And, likewise, the world that is revealed to him appears as possessing certain meanings that are correlative to the adopted techniques.  It appears as a world-for-the Frenchman, a world-for-the-worker, etc., with all the characteristics that we can expect.  But these characteristics have no “ Selbstständigkeit ”; it is above all his world, i.e., the world illuminated by his ends, that allows itself to be discovered as French, proletarian, etc.  However, the other’s existence brings about a de facto limit to my freedom.  The fact is that, through the arising of the other, certain determinations that I am —without having chosen them—appear.  Here I am, indeed, a Jew or an Aryan, handsome or ugly, one-armed, etc.  I am all of that for the other , without any hope of grasping this meaning that I have outside , or, even less, of changing it.  Through language alone will I learn what I am; and even then it will only ever be as the object of an empty intention; any intuition of it is forever denied to me.  If my race or my physical appearance were only an image in the Other or the Other’s opinion of me, we would soon be done with it: but, as we have seen, we are concerned here with objective characteristics which define me in my being-for-the-Other.  As soon as a freedom other than my own arises to confront me, I begin to exist in a new dimension of being and, this time, it is not a matter of my conferring a meaning on brute existents, or of taking up on my own account the meaning that others have conferred on certain objects: it is myself whom I can see conferred with a meaning, and I do not have what I need to take up this meaning on my own account, since it cannot be given to me except in the form of an empty intention.  Thus, something about me—according to this new dimension—exists in the manner of the given , at least for me, since this being that I am is undergone : it is, without being existed .  I learn of it and I undergo it in and through the relations that I maintain with others, in and through their behavior in relation to me; I encounter this being at the origin of a thousand prohibitions and a thousand resistances that I come up against at every moment.  Because I am a minor , I do not have this or that right; because I am a Jew , in certain societies, I will be deprived of certain possibilities, etc.  Yet I cannot in any way feel myself to be Jewish, or feel myself to be a minor or a pariah, to such an extent that I may react against these interdictions by declaring that race, for example, lies purely and simply in the collective imagination, and only individuals exist.  Thus I suddenly encounter here the total alienation of my person: I am something that I did not choose to be.  What are the consequences of this with respect to the situation? We must recognize that we have just encountered a real limit to our freedom, i.e., a way of being that is forced on us, without being founded in our freedom.  But still, we need to be clear: the limit that is imposed does not come from the action of others.  We noted, in an earlier chapter, that we are not dispossessed of our freedom even by torture: we give in to it freely .  More generally, my encounter with a prohibition on my path—“Jews are prohibited from entering here,” “Jewish restaurant, no entry for Aryans,” etc.—refers us to the case we considered earlier (collective techniques), and this prohibition can have meaning only on and through the foundation of my free choice.  So, according to the free possibilities that I have chosen, I may contravene the prohibition, count it as nothing, or on the contrary confer upon it a coercive power which it can hold only by virtue of the weight I accord to it.  Of course it will entirely preserve its character as “emanating from an alien will,” and of course it will have the specific structure of taking me as an object and of thereby manifesting a transcendence which transcends me.  It remains no less true that it takes shape only within my universe and derives its own power of constraint only within the limits of my own choice, and according to whether I prefer life to death in any circumstance or, on the contrary, I regard death, in certain particular cases, as preferable to some types of life, etc.  The true limit to my freedom lies purely and simply in the very fact that another apprehends me as an object-other and in this other, consequent fact that my situation ceases to be a situation for the other and becomes an objective figure, within which I exist as an objective structure.  It is this alienating objectification of my situation that is my situation’s permanent and specific limit, just as the objectification of my being-for-itself into being-for-the-other is the limit of my being.  And it is precisely these two characteristic limits which represent the boundaries of my freedom.  In brief, by virtue of the Other’s existence, I exist in a situation which has an outside and which, by this very fact, has an alienating dimension that I can in no way remove from it, no more than I can directly act upon it.  This limit to my freedom is, we can see, posited by the Other’s pure and simple existence, which is to say by the fact that my transcendence exists for a transcendence.  Thus we may grasp a truth of great importance: we saw just now, while we were remaining within the category of existence-for-itself, that only my freedom could limit my freedom; now we can see, by bringing the other into consideration, that at this new level my freedom also meets its limits in the existence of the Other’s freedom.  Thus, at whichever level we position ourselves, the only limits that a freedom meets will be found by it within freedom.  Just as thought, for Spinoza, can be limited only by thought, in the same way freedom can be limited only by freedom, and its limitation comes about, as an internal finitude, from the fact that it cannot not be freedom, which is to say that it is condemned to be free and, as an external finitude, from the fact that, being freedom, it is for other freedoms which freely apprehend it, in the light of their own ends.  Having said this, we ought first to note that this alienation of the situation does not represent an internal break, nor the introduction of something given as a brute resistance within the situation, such as I live it.  Quite to the contrary, the alienation is neither an internal modification nor a partial change in the situation; it does not appear in the course of temporalization; I only ever encounter it within the situation and it is not, in consequence, ever given to my intuition.  But, as a matter of principle, it escapes me; it is the situation’s very externality, which is to say its being-outside-for-the-other.  We are dealing therefore with an essential characteristic of any situation in general; this characteristic cannot act upon its content but is accepted and taken up by the very person who puts himself in situation .  In this way, the very meaning of our free choice is to make a situation arise which expresses it and of which an essential characteristic is to be alienated , i.e., to exist for the other as a figure in itself.  We cannot escape from this alienation, since it would be absurd to think even of existing otherwise than in situation.  This characteristic does not manifest itself through an internal resistance but, on the contrary, it is felt in and through its very elusiveness.  It is therefore, in the end, not an obstacle which freedom encounters head-on but a sort of centrifugal force within its very nature, a weakness in its mix which means that everything it undertakes will always have a side that it has not chosen, which escapes it and which, for the other, will be pure existence.  A freedom that willed itself as freedom could only will this characteristic at the same time.  However, this does not belong to freedom’s nature , because here there is no nature; besides, even if there were one, we would not be able to infer this from it, since the existence of others is an entirely contingent fact; rather, to enter the world as a freedom confronting others is to enter the world as alienable.  If to will oneself as free is to choose to be in this world here, confronting others, someone who wills this will also will his freedom’s Passion .  The alienated situation, on the other hand, and my own alienated-being are not objectively discovered and noted by me.  In the first place, in fact, we have just seen that anything that is alienated necessarily exists only for the other .  But, in addition, a pure observation, even if it were possible, would not be sufficient.  In fact I cannot experience this alienation without at the same time recognizing the other as a transcendence.  And, as we have seen, this recognition would be meaningless if it were not a free recognition of the Other’s freedom.  Through this free recognition of the Other—through the alienation that I undergo— I accept my being-for-the-Other, whatever it may be, and I accept it precisely because it is my bridge to the Other.  Thus I can apprehend the Other as a freedom only in the free project of apprehending him as such (indeed, it remains always possible for me to freely apprehend the Other as an object), and there is no difference between the free project of recognition of the Other and the free acceptance of my being-for-the-Other.  It is here therefore that my freedom somehow retrieves its own limits, because I can apprehend myself as limited by the Other only insofar as the Other exists for me, and I can make the Other exist for me as a recognized subjectivity only by accepting my being-for-the-Other.  There is no circle here: rather, through my free acceptance of this alienated-being that I undergo, I suddenly make the Other’s transcendence exist for me as such.  It is only by recognizing the anti-Semites’ freedom (whatever use they make of it) and by accepting this being-Jewish that I am for them, it is only in this way that being-Jewish will appear as the situation’s external objective limit; if I prefer, on the contrary, to consider them as pure objects , my being-Jewish will immediately disappear to give way to the simple consciousness (of) being a free transcendence that cannot be qualified.  To recognize others and, if I am Jewish, to accept my being-Jewish are one and the same thing.  Thus, the other’s freedom confers limits on my situation, but I can experience these limits only if I reclaim this being for the other that I am, and give it a meaning in the light of the ends I have chosen.  And, certainly, this acceptance itself is alienated , it has its “outside,” but it is through it that I can experience my being-outside as an “outside.” How, in consequence, will I experience the objective limits of my being—Jew, Aryan, ugly, handsome, a king, a civil servant, an untouchable, etc.—when language has informed me about those limits that are mine ? It cannot be in the way in which I intuitively apprehend the beauty, ugliness, or race of the other, any more than it can be in the way in which I have a non-thetic consciousness (of) projecting myself toward this or that possibility.  It is not that these objective characteristics must necessarily be abstract : some of them are abstract, others not.  My beauty, my ugliness and the insignificance of my features are grasped by the other in their fully concrete state, and his language will indicate this concretion to me; that is what I will reach toward, emptily.  It is not at all therefore a matter of abstraction but of a collection of structures of which some are abstract, but whose totality is an absolute concretion; only it is a collection that is indicated to me as necessarily escaping me.  In effect, it is what I am .  Now, as we noted at the start of Part Two, the for-itself cannot be anything.  For-me, I am no more a teacher or a café waiter than I am handsome or ugly, Jewish or Aryan, witty, vulgar or distinguished.  We will call these characteristics “ unrealizables .” We must be careful not to confuse them with “ imaginaries .” We are dealing here with existences that are perfectly real, but the people to whom these characteristics are really given are not these characteristics; and I, who am them, am unable to realize them.  For example, if someone tells me that I am vulgar , I have often apprehended, through intuition, the nature of vulgarity in others; thus I am able to apply the word “vulgar” to my own person.  But I cannot connect the meaning of this word to my person.  All that is there is only the indication of a connection to be made (but that can be made only by internalizing and subjectivizing the vulgarity, or by objectifying the person —two operations that will give rise to the immediate collapse of the reality being discussed).  Thus we are surrounded to infinity by unrealizables .  Some of these unrealizables are keenly felt by us as irritating absences.  Who has not felt a profound disappointment at not being able after a long exile to realize that he “is in Paris”? The objects are there, and familiarly presented, but I myself am only an absence, only the pure nothingness that is necessary in order for Paris to be there .  My friends or my relatives offer me the image of a promised land when they say: “At last, you’re here! You have come back to Paris!” But access to this promised land is completely denied to me.  And if most people deserve to be reproached for using a “double standard,” depending on whether they apply it to others or to themselves, and if they are inclined to reply, when they feel guilty of a fault for which they had blamed someone else, the night before, “That is not the same thing,” that is because, indeed, “it is not the same thing.” One of the actions is in fact a given object of moral assessment, while the other is a pure transcendence whose justification is carried by its very existence, since its being is choice.  By comparing the results , we may be able to convince its author that the “outside” of the two acts is strictly identical, but even with a boundless good will he will not be able to realize this identity.  That is the source of a good many struggles of the moral conscience, especially the despair at not being able truly to despise oneself, at not being able to realize oneself as guilty, at constantly feeling a gap between the meanings one expresses—“I am guilty,” “I have sinned,” etc.—and one’s real apprehension of the situation.  That is the source, in short, of all the anguishes of “bad conscience,” which is to say the bad faith consciousness whose ideal is to judge itself, i.e., to take up the viewpoint of another in relation to oneself.  But if some particular kinds of unrealizable impress us more than others, if they have been the object of psychological descriptions, they should not blind us to the fact that an infinite number of unrealizables exist, since they represent the reverse side of the situation.  However, these unrealizables are not only appresented as unrealizables: indeed, for them to have the character of unrealizables, they must be disclosed in the light of some project that aims to realize them.  And indeed that is just what we recently noted, when we showed the for-itself accepting its being-for-the-other in and through the very act that recognizes the other’s existence.  Correlatively to this project of acceptance, therefore, the unrealizables disclose themselves as “ to be realized .” In the first place, my acceptance effectively takes place within the perspective of my fundamental project: I do not restrict myself to passively receiving the meaning of “ugliness,” “handicap,” “race,” etc., but on the contrary I can apprehend these characteristics—merely as meanings—only in the light of my own ends.  That is what we are expressing—but by completely reversing the terms—when we say that the fact of being of a particular race may determine a reaction of pride or an inferiority complex.  In fact, race, disability, or ugliness can appear only within the limits of my own choice of inferiority or pride; 73 in other words, they can appear only with a meaning that my freedom confers on them.  That means, once again, that they are for the other but that they can be for me only if I choose them.  The law of my freedom, which means that I am not able to be without choosing myself, even applies here: I do not choose to be what I am for the other, but I can only try to be for myself what I am for the other by choosing myself such as I appear to the other, i.e., by an elective act of acceptance.  A Jew is not first a Jew, in order afterward to be ashamed or proud; but it is his pride at being a Jew, his shame, or his indifference that will reveal his being-Jewish to him, and this being-Jewish is nothing without the free way of taking it up.  Simply put, although I have at my disposal an infinite number of ways of accepting my being-for-the-Other, I cannot not accept it: here we encounter again that condemnation to freedom that we defined earlier as facticity .  I cannot abstain completely in relation to what I am (for the other)—since to reject is not to abstain but is still a way of accepting—but neither can I undergo it passively (which, in one sense, amounts to the same); in rage, hatred, pride, shame, disgusted rejection, or joyful assertion, I have to choose to be what I am.  In this way, the for-itself encounters its unrealizables as “unrealizables to be realized.” This does not take away their character as limits ; quite to the contrary, they are presented to the for-itself as objective and external limits to be internalized .  They have therefore a distinctly compulsory character.  We do not encounter them like an instrument “to be used” within the movement of the free project that I am.  Rather, the unrealizable appears at the same time both as an a priori given limit to my situation (since I have this being for the other) and, in consequence, as existing without waiting for me to give it existence and also as being able to exist only within and through the free project through which I will accept it—with this act of acceptance, obviously, being identical to the synthetic organization of all the actions that aim at realizing the unrealizable for myself .  At the same time, as it is given as an unrealizable, it shows itself as being beyond any attempt that I might make to realize it.  An a priori which, in order to be, requires my commitment even while it depends only on that commitment and places itself from the outset beyond any attempt to realize it: What is this, therefore, if not precisely an imperative ? It is indeed something to be internalized , which is to say that it comes from outside as ready-made ; but an order , no matter what it is, is defined precisely always as an externality that is taken up internally.  For an order to be an order—and not a mere sound, or a pure factual given which someone is merely trying to turn round—it is necessary for me to take it up with my freedom, for me to make of it a structure of my free projects.  But for it to be an order, and not a free movement toward my own ends, it must retain, even at the heart of my free choice, the character of externality .  It is an externality that persists in its externality even in and through the for-itself’s attempt to internalize it.  That is precisely the definition of the unrealizable to be realized , and that is why it is given as an imperative.  But we take the description of this unrealizable further: it is in fact my limit.  But, precisely because it is my limit, it cannot exist as the limit of some given being but as my freedom’s limit.  Therefore my freedom, in choosing freely, chooses its limits; in other words, the free choice of my ends—i.e., of what I am for myself—requires me to accept the limits of this choice, whatever they may be.  Here again the choice is a choice of finitude, as we noted earlier, but rather than the chosen finitude being an internal finitude—i.e., a determination of freedom by itself—the finitude that I accept in taking up the unrealizables is an external finitude.  I choose to have a being at a distance, which limits all my choices and constitutes their reverse choices, which is to say that I choose that my choice should be bounded by something other than itself.  Should I become annoyed by this, and try, by using every means, to reclaim these limits—as we saw in the previous part of this work—it will be necessary, even for the most vigorous of these attempts at recuperation, to found it in the free act of taking up, as limits , the limits that one wishes to internalize.  In this way freedom takes up the unrealizable limits on its own account and places them within the situation, by choosing to be a freedom that is limited by the other’s freedom.  The result is that the situation’s external limits become the situation-limit , i.e., that they are incorporated into the situation from inside with the characteristic of being “unrealizable,” in the form of “unrealizables to be realized,” as the chosen and fugitive reverse side of my choice.  They become one meaning of my desperate endeavor to be , even though they are situated a priori beyond this endeavor, exactly as death—another type of unrealizable that we do not need to consider right now—becomes a situation-limit, on condition that it is taken as an event in life , even though it points toward a world where my presence and my life are no longer realized, i.e., toward life’s “beyond.” The fact that there is a beyond to life, insofar as it gains its meaning only through and in my life and yet remains for me unrealizable, and the fact that there is a freedom beyond my freedom, a situation beyond my situation, and for which what I live as situation is given as an objective figure in the midst of the world: both of these are types of situation-limit whose paradoxical character is to limit my freedom from every side and yet to have no meaning other than that which my freedom confers on them.  With respect to class, race, the body, the other, one’s job, etc., there is a “being-free-for…” Through this, the for-itself projects itself toward one of its possibles, which is always its ultimate possible: because the possibility in question is the possibility of seeing oneself , which is to say of being someone other than oneself, to see oneself from outside.  In the one case as in the other there is a projection of the self toward an “ultimate,” which, internalized by that very act, becomes the thematic and unreachable meaning of the ranked possibles.  One can “be-in-order-to-be-French,” “be-in-order-to-be-a-worker”; the son of a king can “be-in-order-to-reign.” What we have here are limits and states that negate our being, which we have to accept—in the sense in which, for example, a Zionist Jew resolutely accepts himself within his race, i.e., he concretely accepts, once and for all, the permanent alienation of his being, just as the revolutionary worker, through his revolutionary project itself, accepts a “being-in-order-to-be-a-worker.” And, like Heidegger (even though the expressions that he uses—“authentic” and “inauthentic”—are, because of their implicit moral content, questionable and lacking in sincerity), we may point out that the attitude of rejection and flight that always remains possible is, in spite of itself, a free acceptance of what it flees.  Thus, the bourgeois makes himself bourgeois by denying that there are classes, as the worker makes himself a worker by asserting that they exist and by actualizing his “being-in-the-class” through his revolutionary activity.  But, precisely because they are external and can be internalized only as unrealizables, these external limits to freedom will never be a real obstacle to it, nor a limit that is undergone.  Freedom is total and infinite, which does not mean that it has no limits but that it never encounters them.  The only limits that freedom comes up against in every instant are those which it imposes on itself, and which we have discussed in relation to the past, my surroundings and techniques.  (E) My death After death had come to seem the quintessential example of the inhuman—since it lay on the other side of “the wall”—it was suddenly thought better to consider it from an entirely different point of view, i.e., as an event in human life.  This change is easily explicable: death is a term , and every term (whether it be the final or the first) is a Janus bifrons , 74 whether we regard it as adhering to the nothingness of being that limits the process in question or whether, on the contrary, we encounter it as pressed into the series that it terminates, as a being that belongs to an existing process and is, in one way, constitutive of its meaning.  In this way, one side of a melody’s final chord turns, in its entirety, toward silence, i.e., toward the nothingness of sound that will follow the melody; in one sense it is made out of silence, since the silence that will follow is already present in the resolution chord as its meaning.  But, by another side entirely, it adheres to that plenum of being in which the melody in question consists: without it, this melody would remain in midair, and this final indecision would reach back upstream, note by note, to confer on each one of them an unfinished character.  Rightly or wrongly—as we are not yet able to determine—death has always been regarded as the final term of human life.  As such, it was natural that a philosophy concerned first and foremost to clarify the position of humanity in relation to the absolute inhuman surrounding it should consider death in the first place as a door opening on to the nothingness of human-reality—whether this nothingness was, furthermore, an absolute cessation of being, or existence in a nonhuman form.  Thus we might say that there has been—in correlation with the major realist theories—a realist conception of death, to the extent that this latter appeared as an immediate contact with the nonhuman; death thereby escaped man, at the same time as molding him to the nonhuman absolute.  Of course, it was out of the question for any idealist and humanist conception of reality to tolerate any encounter of man with the inhuman, even as his limit.  Were that the case, all that would be required to show man in a nonhuman light would be to take up the perspective of that limit.  75 The idealist attempt to reclaim death has not primarily been the work of philosophers but of poets like Rilke 76 or novelists like Malraux.  It sufficed to envisage death as the final term belonging to the series.  If in this way the series retrieves its “ terminus ad quem ,” 77 precisely because of this “ ad ,” which marks its interiority, death becomes humanized and internalized as the end of life: man is no longer able to meet anything other than the human; there is no longer any other side to life, and death is a human phenomenon; it is the ultimate phenomenon of life, and remains life.  As such, it influences, against the current, the entire life: life is limited by life, and becomes, like Einstein’s world, “finite but unlimited”; death becomes the meaning of life, just as the resolution chord is the meaning of the melody.  There is nothing miraculous about this: it is a term in the series in question and—as we know—each term in a series is always present to all the terms of the series.  But the death that is hereby retrieved does not remain merely human; it becomes mine .  By becoming internalized, it is individualized; it is no longer the great unknowable by which a human is limited but the phenomenon of my personal life which makes this life into a unique life, i.e., a life that does not recommence, at which we can never have another shot.  I thereby become responsible for my death , as for my life—not for the empirical and contingent phenomenon of my demise but for this character of finitude by virtue of which my life, like my death, is my life.  It is in this sense that Rilke endeavors to show that each man’s end resembles his life, since the entire individual life has been a preparation for this end; it is in this sense that Malraux, in Les Conquérants , shows how European culture, by giving some Asians a sense of their death, suddenly imbued them with the despairing and intoxicating truth that “life is unique.” 78 It was left to Heidegger to give a philosophical form to this humanization of death: if indeed Dasein does not undergo anything, precisely because it is a project and anticipation, it must be the anticipation and project of its own death as the possibility of no longer actualizing a presence in the world.  Thus death became Dasein ’s ownmost possibility; the being of human-reality is defined as “Being-toward-death.” 79 Insofar as Dasein decides on his project toward death, he realizes his freedom toward death and constitutes himself as a totality through his free choice of finitude.  At first sight, such a theory can only seduce us: by internalizing death, it serves our own purposes; by being internalized, freedom retrieves this apparent limit to our freedom.  However, we should not allow either the convenience of these views or the incontestable amount of truth that they contain to lead us astray.  We must take up our investigation of this question by going back to the beginning.  It is clear that human-reality, through whom worldhood enters reality, cannot encounter the inhuman; the concept of the “inhuman” is itself a concept belonging to man.  We must therefore abandon any hope, even if death was in itself a transition to a nonhuman absolute, of regarding it as a window on to this absolute.  Death reveals nothing other than ourselves, and from a human point of view.  Does that mean that it belongs a priori to human-reality? What we should note right at the start is death’s absurd character.  In this sense, any temptation to regard it as a resolution chord at the end of a melody must be strictly pushed away.  It has often been said that we are in the situation of a condemned prisoner, among other condemned prisoners, who does not know the date of his execution but who sees his fellow prisoners being executed every day.  That is not quite correct: we ought rather to compare ourselves to someone sentenced to death who is bravely preparing himself for his execution, who is putting all his efforts into cutting a good figure on the scaffold and who, meanwhile, is carried away by an epidemic of Spanish flu.  This was understood by Christian wisdom, which recommends that we prepare for death as if it might arrive at any moment .  In this way we have hoped to reclaim death by metamorphosing it into a “death that is awaited.” If in fact the meaning of our life becomes a waiting for death, the latter can only, in arriving, fix its seal on life.  That is basically the most positive aspect of Heidegger’s “resoluteness” ( Entschlossenheit ).  Unfortunately, this advice is much easier to give than to follow, not because of a natural weakness of human-reality or an original pro-ject of inauthenticity but because of death itself.  We can, indeed, wait for one particular death, but we cannot simply wait for death .  The sleight of hand that Heidegger performs is easy enough to detect: he begins by individualizing the death of each one of us, by pointing out that it is the death of a person , an individual, and the “only thing that nobody can do for me,” and then he exploits this incomparable individuality which has been—on the basis of Dasein —conferred on death, in order to individualize Dasein itself.  It is by freely projecting itself toward its ultimate possibility that Dasein will accede to authentic existence, and tear itself away from everyday banality to attain the irreplaceable uniqueness of a person.  But here there is a circle: How in fact can we prove that death has this individuality and the power to confer it? Certainly, if we describe death as my death, I am able to await it: it is a distinct and defined possibility.  But is the death that will strike me my death? First of all, to say that “dying is the only thing that nobody can do for me” is entirely gratuitous.  Or rather, there is an obvious bad faith in the reasoning: if in fact we consider death as the ultimate subjective possibility, an event which concerns only the for-itself, it is evident that nobody can die for me.  But in that case it follows that none of my possibilities, seen from that point of view—which is that of the cogito —whether it is taken up within an authentic or an inauthentic existence, may be projected by someone else.  Nobody can love for me, if by that we mean making those vows that are my vows, feeling those emotions (however banal they may be) that are my emotions.  And here the “my” has nothing to do with a personality that I have won from everyday banality (which would allow Heidegger to retort that, for a love that I experience to be my love, and not the way “they” love, within me, 80 it is precisely necessary that I should be “free toward death”) but, quite simply, with the ipseity that Heidegger explicitly accords to each Dasein —whether it exists in an authentic or inauthentic mode—when he asserts that “ Dasein is in each case mine.” Thus, from this point of view, the most everyday love is—like death—irreplaceable and unique: nobody can love for me.  If, on the contrary, we consider my acts within the world from the point of view of their function, their efficiency, and their result, it is clear that another can always do what I am doing.  If it is a matter of making this woman happy, or protecting her life or her freedom, of giving her the means of finding salvation or merely of making a home with her, of “giving her children”—if that is what we call loving someone—then someone else could love in my place, and he could even love someone for me: that is even the meaning of those sacrifices, recounted a thousand times in sentimental novels, which show us the loving hero, wishing for the happiness of the woman whom he loves and stepping aside for his rival because the latter “will know how to love her better than he can.” Here the rival is nominally given the task of “ loving for ” the hero, because loving someone is defined simply as “making them happy through the love that one brings them.” And the same will go for all my actions.  Only my death will also belong in this category: if to die is to die in order to edify, to bear witness, for one’s country, etc., anyone can die in my place—as in the song, in which the person to be eaten is the one who draws the short straw.  81 In brief, there is no kind of personalizing power that belongs especially to my death.  Quite on the contrary, it becomes my death only if I have already taken up the standpoint of subjectivity; it is my subjectivity, defined through the prereflective cogito , which makes my death into something subjective which is irreplaceable, and not death which gives my for-itself an irreplaceable ipseity.  In this case, death cannot be characterized as my death because it is death and, in consequence, its essential structure as death is not sufficient to make it into the kind of personalized and qualified event that we might await .  But, in addition, death cannot be in any way awaited, unless it is designated very precisely as my death sentence (the execution that will take place in a week, the outcome of my illness, which I know to be imminent and brutal, etc.), because what it reveals is nothing but the absurdity of any waiting, even if the waiting is exactly for it .  In the first place, in fact, we need to carefully distinguish here between two meanings of the verb “to await” that we have continued to conflate: to expect death is not to await death.  82 We can only await a determined event that some equally determined processes are about to actualize.  I can await the arrival of the train from Chartres because I know that it has left the station at Chartres and that each turn of the wheel is bringing it closer to the station in Paris.  Of course, it may be delayed; it is even possible that an accident will happen.  But it remains no less the case that the process itself through which its arrival at the station will be actualized is “ under way ,” and here the phenomena that may delay or eliminate this arrival at the station only mean that the process is merely a relatively closed system, which is relatively isolated and that it is in fact—as Meyerson says—immersed within a universe with a “fibrous structure.” 83 Thus I can say that I am awaiting Pierre, and that “I expect his train will be late.” But, precisely, the possibility of my death only means that, biologically, I am only a relatively closed and relatively isolated system; it only shows that my body belongs within the totality of existents.  Its type is that of the probable lateness of trains, not that of Pierre’s arrival.  It belongs with the unforeseen, unexpected hitch, of which we must always take account , by preserving its specific character of being unexpected—but that we cannot await , because by nature it is lost in indeterminacy.  If we concede, in fact, that the factors strictly condition each other—which is not even proved, and would involve a metaphysical choice—they are infinite in number, and their implications are infinitely infinite.  As a collection, they do not constitute a system; the effect we are envisaging—my death—at least from the point of view we are considering, cannot be expected at any date, nor in consequence awaited.  Perhaps, while I am peacefully writing in this bedroom, the state of the universe is such that my death has become considerably closer; but perhaps, on the contrary, it has just moved considerably further away.  If, for example, I am waiting for a mobilization order, I may believe that my death is close, which is to say the probability of a death in the near future has significantly increased; but in point of fact it is possible that at the same time an international conference has met in secret and that it has found the way to prolong peace.  Thus I cannot say that the passing minute has brought me closer to death.  It is true that it brings me closer if I consider the fact that my life is limited, but, within these very elastic limits (I may die a centenarian or, tomorrow, at the age of thirty-seven), I cannot know if in fact it is bringing me closer or taking me further away from this term.  And there is a considerable qualitative difference between a death at the limit of old age and a sudden death that annihilates us in our maturity or youth.  To await the first of these is to accept that life is a limited undertaking; it is one way among others of choosing finitude, and of selecting our ends on finitude’s foundation.  To await the second would mean I was waiting for my life to be a failed undertaking.  If the only deaths that existed were the deaths brought about by old age (or by an explicit death sentence), I might be able to await my death.  But the distinctive feature of death is that, precisely before it is due, it can always surprise those who are waiting for it at such and such a date.  And if a death in old age may merge into the finitude of our choice and thereby be lived as our life’s resolution chord (we are given a task and given time in order to fulfill it), a sudden death, on the contrary, is something that cannot in any way be expected, because it is indeterminate and, by definition, we cannot expect it at any date.  With such a death it is always possible for us to die, taken by surprise, before the expected date and, in consequence, that our waiting for it is— as an act of waiting —an imposture, or for us to survive beyond that date and, as we amounted to no more than our waiting for it, that we survive beyond ourselves.  Moreover, as a sudden death is only qualitatively different from the other kind insofar as we live one or the other, and as, biologically—i.e., from the point of view of the universe—they do not differ in any way with respect to their causes and determining factors, the lack of determinacy in the one extends in fact to the other; thus it is not possible, other than through blindness or bad faith, to await a death in old age.  We have in fact every chance of dying before we have fulfilled our task or, on the contrary, of surviving beyond it.  The probability therefore of our death presenting itself—like Sophocles’s death, for example—in the manner of a resolution chord is very weak.  But if it is only chance that decides the character of our death (and, therefore, of our life), then even the kind of death which most closely resembles the end of a melody cannot be awaited as such; chance, in deciding it, wholly deprives it of the character of a harmonious end.  Indeed, in order to confer its meaning on a melody, the end of the melody must emanate from the melody itself.  A death like that of Sophocles will therefore resemble a resolution chord, but it will not be one—just as the group of letters formed by throwing several blocks may perhaps resemble a word, but is not one.  This constant appearance of chance at the heart of my projects cannot therefore be grasped as my possibility but, on the contrary, as the nihilation of all my possibilities, a nihilation that itself no longer forms part of my possibilities .  Thus death is not my possibility of no longer actualizing a presence within the world but a nihilation that is always possible of my possibles, and which lies outside my possibilities .  Moreover, if we start out from a consideration of meanings, this can be expressed in a slightly different way.  As we know, human-reality is signifying .  Therefore it becomes acquainted with what it is by what it is not or—alternatively—that it is still forth-coming .  84 If therefore it is constantly committed within its own future, we are prompted to say that it is waiting for this future to be confirmed.  Indeed, insofar as it is in the future, our future 85 sketches out in advance a present that will be ; we place ourselves in the hands of this present which, by itself, in the capacity of the present, must be able to confirm or to disconfirm the meaning, sketched out in advance, that I am.  As this present will itself freely reclaim the past in the light of a new future, we are not able to determine it but only to pro-ject and to wait for it.  The meaning of my current behavior is the reprimand that I wish this person, who has seriously offended me, to receive.  But how can I know that this reprimand will not become transformed into an irritated and timid stuttering, and that the meaning of my present behavior will not be transformed in the past ? Freedom limits freedom, and the past draws its meaning from the present.  As we have shown, this explains the paradox that our current behavior is both wholly translucent to us (the prereflective cogito ) and at the same time wholly concealed by a free determination that we are obliged to await: the adolescent is both fully conscious of the mystical meaning of his behavior and, at the same time, obliged to defer to the entirety of his future in order to decide whether he is in the process of “going through a crisis of puberty” or committing himself for good to the path of devotion.  In this way our subsequent freedom, insofar as it is not our current possibility but the foundation of possibilities that we are not yet, constitutes something like an opacity in full translucency, something akin to what Barrès called a “mystery in full light.” 86 That explains why, necessarily, we have to wait for ourselves .  Our life is only one long waiting: waiting, first, for the actualization of our ends (to be committed to an undertaking is to be waiting for its outcome), waiting above all for ourselves (even if this undertaking is achieved, even if I have been able to make myself loved, to obtain this distinction or that honor, the place, the meaning, and the value of this undertaking within my life remain to be determined).  That does not stem from a contingent defect in human “nature,” from an agitation that prevents us from confining ourselves to the present and which might be corrected by exercise, but from the very nature of the for-itself, which “is” to the extent to which it temporalizes itself.  Thus we must regard our life as being made up not only of periods of waiting but of waitings for waitings, which are themselves waiting for waitings.  That is the very structure of ipseity: to be a self is to come toward oneself.  All of these waitings obviously make reference to a final term that could be awaited without any longer waiting for anything, a state of rest that would be being , and no longer a waiting to be.  The whole series is suspended from this final term that is by definition never given , and which is the value of our being, i.e., obviously a plenitude of the “in-itself, for-itself” type.  87 Through this final term, our reclamation of our past would be achieved once and for all; we would know forever whether this ordeal of our youth was productive or harmful, whether this crisis of puberty was a whim or really prefigured my subsequent commitments; the curve of our life would be fixed forever.  In short, the account would be settled.  The Christians have tried to present death as this final term.  The Reverend P.  Boisselot, in a private conversation with me, led me to understand that the “Last Judgment” was precisely this settling of accounts, which means we can no longer have another shot and that we are , at last, what we have been , irremediably.  But here there is a mistake, analogous to the one we pointed out earlier in Leibniz, even though it is located at the other end of existence.  For Leibniz we are free, since all our acts unfold from our essence.  However, the fact that our essence was not chosen by us is enough to make all this freedom, in matters of detail, conceal a total servitude: God chose Adam’s essence.  Conversely, if it is the drawing up of the account which gives our life its meaning and its value, it hardly matters that all the acts from which the weave of our life is made are free: its very meaning escapes us if we do not ourselves choose the moment when the account is to be drawn up.  That is what was keenly sensed by the libertine author of an anecdote echoed by Diderot.  Two brothers appear before the divine tribunal, on the Day of Judgment.  The first says to God: “Why did you make me die so young?” and God replies: “To save you.  If you had lived longer, you would have committed a crime, like your brother.” So the brother asks, in turn: “Why did you make me die so old?” If death is not a free determination of our being, it cannot terminate our life: one minute more or less, and perhaps everything will change; if this minute is added to, or taken away from, my account, even if we allow that I am using it freely, the meaning of my life escapes me.  Now, for Christians, death comes from God: he chooses our hour and, in general, I clearly understand that, even if I am the one who makes it the case in general, by temporalizing myself, that there are minutes and hours, I am not the one who establishes the minute of my death: the sequences of the universe decide that.  If that is so, we cannot even say any longer that death confers from outside a meaning on life: a meaning can come only from subjectivity itself.  Since death does not appear on the foundation of our freedom, it can only deprive life of all meaning .  If I await acts of waiting for waiting, and if, all at once, the object of my final act of waiting and the person who is waiting are eliminated, the waiting retrospectively acquires a character of absurdity .  For thirty years of his life this young man has been waiting to be a great writer; but this waiting itself was not sufficient: it will be a conceited and foolish stubbornness, or a deep understanding of his value, depending on the books that he will write.  His first book has appeared but, taken in isolation, what does it mean? It is the book of someone starting out.  Let us grant that is good: it will receive its meaning only through the future.  If it is the only book, it is an inauguration and, at the same time, a testament.  There was only one book for him to write, so he is limited and encircled by his work; he will not be “a great writer.” If the novel takes its place within a mediocre series, it is an “accident.” If it is followed by other, better books, it may place its author in the first rank.  But now it is death, indeed, that strikes the writer, at the very moment when he was anxiously testing himself to find out if he is “cut out” to write another work, at the moment when he is waiting for himself.  That is sufficient to make everything fall into indeterminacy: I cannot say that the dead writer is the author of a single book (in the sense in which he might have had only one book to be written), nor that he has written several (since, in fact, only one has appeared).  I cannot say anything: if we suppose that Balzac died before Les Chouans , 88 he would remain as the author of a few execrable novels of adventure.  But all of a sudden, this very waiting that this young dead man was —this waiting to be a great man—loses any kind of meaning; it is neither an obstinate and conceited blindness nor the true meaning of his own value, since nothing will ever decide this.  It would be pointless, in fact, to attempt to decide it by considering the sacrifices which he accepted for his art, the obscure and harsh life which he agreed to lead: so many mediocre people have had the strength to make similar sacrifices.  On the contrary, the final value of this behavior remains in suspense or, alternatively, all of it together—particular instances of behavior, of waiting, values—falls all at once into absurdity.  Thus, death is never what gives life its meaning: it is, on the contrary, that which eliminates all meaning from it.  If we are to die, our life has no meaning, because its problems never receive any solution and because even the meaning of its problems remains indeterminate.  To escape this necessity, any recourse to suicide would be futile.  Suicide cannot be regarded as an end to life of which I am the distinctive foundation.  Indeed, as an act in my life, it requires a meaning itself, which the future alone can give it; but as it is the last act of my life, this future is denied it; thus it remains wholly indeterminate.  If in fact I escape death, or “fail myself,” will I not judge my suicide, later, to be an act of cowardice? Might the course of events now show me that other solutions were possible? But as these solutions can only be my own projects, they can appear only if I am living.  Suicide is an absurdity that plunges my life into absurdity.  We should note that these remarks are drawn from a consideration not of death but, on the contrary, of life.  It is because the for-itself is the being for whom being is in question in its being, and because the for-itself is the being who always lays claim to an “after,” that there is no place for death within the being that it is for-itself.  What could it mean to await death, therefore, apart from a waiting for an indeterminate event that reduces to absurdity any waiting activity, including even that of waiting for death? The activity of waiting for death will destroy itself, because it will be the negation of all waiting.  My pro-ject toward a death is comprehensible (suicide, martyrdom, heroism), but not the project toward my death as the indeterminate possibility of no longer actualizing a presence within the world, because this project would be the destruction of all projects.  Thus death cannot be my ownmost possibility; 89 it cannot even be one of my possibilities.  Besides, to the extent that it can be revealed to me, death is not only the ever possible nihilation of all of my possibles—a nihilation that lies outside my possibilities—and it is not only the project that destroys all projects and destroys itself, the impossible destruction of all my waiting and my expectations: 90 it is the triumph of the Other’s viewpoint over the viewpoint on myself that I am .  That is probably what Malraux means when, in L’Espoir , he says of death that it “transforms life into destiny.” 91 Indeed death is only the nihilation of my possibilities in its negative aspect; as, in point of fact, I am only my possibilities through the nihilation of the being-in-itself that I have to be, death—as the nihilation of a nihilation—posits my being as in-itself in the sense in which, for Hegel, the negation of a negation is an affirmation.  As long as the for-itself is “living,” it surpasses its past toward its future, and the past is what the for-itself has to be.  When the for-itself “ceases to be living” this does not entail the abolition of its past: the disappearance of the nihilating being does not affect the past in its being, whose type is in-itself; it sinks into the in-itself.  My life in its entirety is ; that does not mean that it is a harmonious totality but that it has ceased to be pending in relation to itself, and that it can no longer change itself merely through its consciousness of itself.  But, on the contrary, the meaning of any particular phenomenon in this life is fixed from that point on, not by itself but by that open totality in which the arrested life consists.  As we have seen, this meaning in its primary and fundamental aspect is an absence of meaning .  But in its secondary and derivative aspect, a thousand scintillations, a thousand iridescences of relative meanings may play over this fundamental absurdity of a “dead” life.  For example, whatever its ultimate pointlessness may have been, it remains the case that Sophocles’s life was happy, that Balzac’s life was prodigiously hard-working, etc.  Naturally, these general qualifications can be further narrowed down; we may risk a description or an analysis at the same time as a narration of this life.  We will obtain some more distinct characteristics; for example we may be able to say about this dead woman, as Mauriac says of one of his heroines, that she lived in “cautious despair”; we may apprehend the meaning of Pascal’s “soul” (i.e., of his inner “life”) as “superb and bitter,” as Nietzsche wrote.  We can go so far as to qualify such and such an episode as “cowardly” or “tactless” without losing sight of the fact, however, that the contingent stop that was put to that “being-constantly-pending” of the living for-itself allows us to confer (on the foundation of a radical absurdity) only a relative meaning to the episode in question, and that this meaning is an essentially provisional meaning, whose provisional quality has accidentally become definitive.  But these various explanations of the meaning of Pierre’s life had the effect, when it was Pierre himself who was applying them to his own life, of changing its meaning and orientation, because every description of one’s own life, when it is hazarded by the for-itself, is a project of the self beyond that life and, as the project which alters it is thereby aggregated within the life that it alters, it is Pierre’s own life whose meaning was being metamorphosed as it continuously temporalized itself.  But, now that his life is dead, only the other’s memory can prevent it from shriveling up in its in itself plenitude and cutting all its ties to the present.  The characteristic of a dead life is that it is a life of which the other becomes the guardian.  That does not mean merely that the other keeps hold of the life of “the deceased” by carrying out an explicit and cognitive reconstitution of it.  Quite to the contrary, such a reconstitution is just one of the possible attitudes that the other may take up in relation to the dead life and, in consequence, the shape of a “reconstituted life” (within the family environment by means of the memories of close relatives, within the historical environment) is a particular destiny that comes to characterize some lives, to the exclusion of others.  The necessary result is that the opposite quality—“a life that has fallen into oblivion”—also represents a specific destiny that we can describe, which comes to certain lives from the other.  92 To be forgotten is to be the object of an attitude of another, and of an implicit decision by the Other.  To be forgotten, in fact, is to be resolutely apprehended for eternity as an element that has merged within a mass (the “feudal lords of the thirteenth century,” the “bourgeois whigs” of the eighteenth century, the “Soviet bureaucrats,” etc.); it is in no way to be annihilated but it is to lose one’s personal existence in order to be constituted alongside others in a collective existence.  This is a good demonstration of what we wished to prove, which is that the other cannot at first be without contact with the dead, in order to decide (or in order for circumstances to decide) afterward that he will have such and such a relation with certain particular dead people (those he knew while they were alive, the “great dead men,” etc.).  In reality, the relation to the dead—to all of the dead—is an essential structure of the fundamental relation that we have called “being-for-the-Other.” In arising into being, the for-itself has to take up a position in relation to the dead; its initial project organizes them into large anonymous masses or distinct individuals, and it determines the separation or the absolute proximity of these collective masses, as of these individuals: he unfolds the temporal distances from them to him, in temporalizing himself, just as he unfolds spatial distances on the basis of his surroundings.  By becoming acquainted, through his end, with what he is, he decides on the importance of each of the deceased communities or individuals; this group, which for Pierre will be utterly anonymous and amorphous, will be particularized and structured for me; that other one, which is thoroughly uniform for me, will manifest, for Jean, its individual components.  Byzantium, Rome, Athens, the last Crusade, the Convention 93 —so many immense necropolises which I can see from far off or close up, in a cavalier or detailed fashion, according to the position that I take up, that I “am,” to the point at which it is not impossible, so long as one understands this the right way, to define a “person” in terms of his dead, which is to say in terms of the sectors of individualization or collectivization he has determined within his necropolis, by the roads and paths he has traced, the lessons he has decided to be taught, the “roots” he has put down.  Of course, the dead choose us, but it is necessary in the first place for us to have chosen them.  Here we encounter again the original relation which joins facticity to freedom; we choose our attitude toward the dead, but it is not possible for us not to choose one.  An attitude of indifference toward the dead is quite possible (we can find examples of it in the “ Heimatlos ,” 94 in certain revolutionaries, or individualists).  But this indifference—which consists in making the dead “die again”—is, in relation to them, one behavior among others.  Thus, through its very facticity, the for-itself is thrown into a complete “responsibility” in relation to the dead; he is obliged to freely decide on their fate.  In particular, when it is a matter of the dead who surround us, it is not possible for us not to decide—explicitly or implicitly—on the fate of their undertakings.  This is manifest when we are talking about a son who takes up his father’s business, or a disciple who takes up the school and doctrines of his teacher.  But, even though the connection is less clearly visible in a good many circumstances, it is also true in all cases in which the dead person and the living person in question belong to the same historical and concrete community.  It is I, and the men of my generation, who decide the meaning of the efforts and the undertakings of the previous generation, whether they reclaim and continue their social and political endeavors, or whether they effect a decisive break and send back the dead into impotence.  As we have seen, the worth and the meaning of Lafayette’s undertaking are determined by America, in 1917.  Thus, from this point of view, the difference between life and death appears clearly: life decides on its own meaning, because it is always “suspended”; in its essence it has a power of self-critique and self-metamorphosis which means it defines itself as a “not-yet” or, alternatively, that its way of being is to change what it is.  A dead life does not for all that cease to change, and yet it is done ; its die is cast, therefore, and henceforth it will undergo its changes without being in any way responsible for them.  What happens to the life here is not just an arbitrary and definitive totalization but, in addition, a radical transformation: nothing can any longer happen to the life from within it; it is entirely closed, and nothing more can enter into it; but, from outside, its meaning does not stop changing.  Right up to the death of this apostle of peace, the meaning of his undertakings (madness, or a profound sense of reality, success, or failure) was within his hands; “as long as I am here, there will be no war.” But to the extent to which this meaning exceeds the limits of a single individuality, to the extent to which the person is acquainted with what he is by an objective situation to be brought about (peace in Europe), death represents a complete dispossession : it is the other who dispossesses the apostle of peace of the very meaning of his efforts—and, therefore, of his being—by taking up the task, despite himself and merely through his arising, of transforming into a failure or a success, into madness or the intuition of a genius, the very undertaking through which the person was becoming acquainted with what he was in his being.  Thus the very existence of death alienates us entirely, in our own life, to the advantage of the Other.  To be dead is to become prey to the living.  That means therefore that a person who tries to grasp the meaning of his future death is obliged to discover himself to be the future prey of others.  There is therefore a case of alienation that we did not consider, in the section of this work that we devoted to the For-the-Other: the alienations that we examined, in fact, were of the type that we could nihilate by transforming the other into a transcended-transcendence, just as we could nihilate our outside by an absolute and subjective positing of our freedom.  As long as I am living, I can escape what I am for the other by showing myself, through the ends that I freely posit, that I am nothing and that I make myself be what I am; as long as I am living, I can belie what the other uncovers in me by already pro-jecting myself toward other ends and, in any case, by discovering that my dimension of being-for-myself is incommensurable with my dimension of being-for-the-other.  In this way I was incessantly escaping my outside, and incessantly grasped back by it, without a definitive victory belonging, “in this dubious battle,” 95 to one or the other of these modes of being.  But, without becoming exactly allied with either of these adversaries in this battle itself, the fact of death bestows the final victory on the viewpoint of the other, by taking the battle and what is at stake to new territory, which is to say by suddenly eliminating one of the combatants.  In this sense, to die is to be condemned, whatever ephemeral victory one may have won against the other, and even if one has made use of the other to “sculpt one’s own statue,” 96 to no longer exist other than through the other, and to receive from him one’s meaning and the very meaning of one’s victory.  Indeed, if one shares the realist opinions that we expounded in Part Three, one is obliged to acknowledge that my existence after death is not the mere spectral survival, “in the other’s consciousness,” of mere representations (images, memories, etc.) that concerned me.  My being-for-the-Other is a real being and if, after my demise, it remains between the Other’s hands, like a coat that I have left him with, it is in the form of a real dimension of my being—a dimension that has become my only dimension—and not a flimsy ghost.  Richelieu, Louis XV, my grandfather, are in no way the sum of my memories, not even the sum of the memories or the pieces of knowledge of all those people who have heard of them; they are beings that are objective and opaque but which have simply been reduced to the single dimension of externality.  In this capacity, they will continue their history in the human world, but they will no longer ever be anything but transcended-transcendences in the midst of the world.  In this way, my death does not only disarm my acts of waiting by definitively removing any waiting , and by leaving indeterminate my actualization of the ends by which I am acquainted with what I am—but, in addition, it confers a meaning from outside on everything that I lived as a subjectivity; it seizes back all this subjective domain, which was able to protect itself, as long as it “was living,” against externalization, and it deprives it of all subjective meaning, in order to hand it over, on the contrary, to any objective meaning that the other cares to give it.  Nonetheless, we should point out that this “destiny” which is in this way conferred on my life also remains, for its part, in suspense, or pending, because the answer to this question: “What will be the definitive historical destiny of Robespierre?” depends on the answer to this prior question: “Does History have a meaning?”—which is to say, “Must it become complete, or does it merely end ?” This question has not been resolved—perhaps it is insoluble, since all the answers given to it (including the answer given by idealism: “The history of Egypt is the history of Egyptology”) are themselves historical.  Thus, in allowing that I can encounter my death within my life, we are able to see that it cannot be a pure halt in my subjectivity, which, as an internal event within it, would in the end concern this subjectivity alone.  If it is true that dogmatic realism was wrong to see in death the state of being dead —which is to say as a transcendent in relation to life—it remains no less true that the death that I can encounter as mine necessarily involves something other than me.  Indeed, insofar as it is a nihilation of my possibles that is always possible, it is outside my possibilities and I cannot therefore await it, which is to say throw myself toward it as I do toward my possibilities.  It cannot therefore belong to the for-itself’s ontological structure.  Insofar as it is the triumph of the other person over me, it refers us to a fact that is, of course, fundamental—but, as we have seen, wholly contingent—which is the other’s existence.  We would not know this death if the other did not exist: it could not be revealed to us, nor in particular could it be constituted as the metamorphosis of our being into destiny; it would be, in point of fact, the simultaneous disappearance of the for-itself and the world, the subjective and the objective, of the signifier and of every meaning.  If death can, to a certain extent, be revealed to us as the metamorphosis of those particular meanings that are my meanings, it is in consequence of the fact of the existence of a signifying other, who ensures that the meanings and the signs are taken up.  It is because of the other that my death is my falling out of the world as a subjectivity, rather than being the annihilation of consciousness and of the world.  There is therefore an undeniable and fundamental character of fact —which is to say a radical contingency—about death, as about the Other’s existence.  This contingency removes it in advance from any ontological conjectures.  And to meditate on my life by considering it on the basis of death would be to meditate on my subjectivity by taking up the other’s viewpoint on it; we have seen that this is not possible.  Thus, against Heidegger, we should conclude that death, far from being my own possibility, is a contingent fact which, as such, escapes me on principle and which originates in my facticity.  I cannot discover my death, nor can I await it or take up an attitude in relation to it, because it is that which reveals itself to be undiscoverable, which disarms every act of waiting, which slides into all our attitudes—and especially into those one might take up in relation to it—in order to transform them into externalized and frozen modes of behavior, whose meaning is handed over forever to people other than ourselves.  Death, like birth, is a pure fact; it comes to us from outside and transforms us into an “outside.” At bottom it is indistinguishable from birth, and what we are calling “facticity” is the identity of birth and of death.  Does that mean that death traces out the limits of our freedom? By abandoning Heidegger’s Being-toward-death, have we abandoned forever the possibility of freely giving our being a meaning for which we are responsible? Quite on the contrary, it seems to us that death, by revealing itself to us as it does, frees us entirely from its alleged constraint.  A little reflection will make this clearer.  But we need first of all to radically separate the two ideas that are ordinarily joined, of death and of finitude.  We usually seem to think that it is death that constitutes our finitude and reveals it to us.  The result of this contamination is that death assumes the shape of an ontological necessity, and finitude, on the contrary, borrows from death its character of contingency.  Heidegger, in particular, seems to have constructed his entire theory of “ Sein-zum-Tode ” 97 on a complete identification of death with finitude; in the same way, when Malraux tells us that death reveals life’s uniqueness to us, he seems to think that the reason we are unable to have another shot and are, therefore, finite is just because we are going to die.  But if we examine this matter more closely, we will see their mistake: death is a contingent fact that has to do with our facticity; finitude is an ontological structure of the for-itself who determines its freedom, and exists only in and through the free project of the end that acquaints me with my being.  In other words, even if it were immortal, human-reality would remain finite because in choosing itself as human it makes itself finite.  To be finite is, in fact, to choose oneself, i.e., to become acquainted with what one is by projecting oneself toward one possible, in a way that excludes others.  The very act of freedom is therefore the acceptance and creation of finitude.  If I make myself, I make myself finite and, in consequence, my life is unique.  From that point on, even if I am immortal, I am prohibited from “having another shot”; the irreversibility of temporality prohibits this, and this irreversibility is nothing but the distinctive characteristic of a freedom that temporalizes itself.  Of course, if I am immortal and I have had to set aside possible B in order to actualize possible A, the opportunity to actualize that rejected possible will be offered to me again.  But, by virtue merely of the fact that this opportunity will be presented after the opportunity that was rejected, it will not be the same and thenceforth, by irremediably setting aside the first opportunity, I will have made myself finite for eternity.  From this point of view, an immortal, just like a mortal, is born several people and makes himself just one.  For all that it is temporally indefinite, which is to say without limits, its “life” will be no less finite in its very being because it makes itself unique.  Death has nothing to do with it—it arrives “in the meantime”—and human-reality’s revelation of its own finitude does not amount to a discovery of its mortality.  Thus death is in no way an ontological structure of my being, at least not insofar as it is for-itself ; it is the other who is mortal in his being.  There is no place for death in being-for-itself; it can neither await it, nor actualize it, nor project itself toward it.  It is in no way the foundation of its finitude and, in general terms, the for-itself can neither found it from within, as the pro-ject of original freedom, nor receive it from outside as a quality.  What is it, then? Nothing but a specific aspect of facticity and being-for-the-other, which is to say nothing but something given .  It is absurd that we are born, and it is absurd that we die; moreover, this absurdity is presented as the permanent alienation of my being—a possibility that is no longer my possibility but that of the other.  It is therefore an external and de facto limit of my subjectivity.  But can we not recognize here the description that we gave in the preceding paragraph? This de facto limit that we are obliged, in one sense, to endorse—since nothing can penetrate us from outside, and in some sense we have to feel death if we are to be able even to name it—but which, on the other hand, is never encountered by the for-itself, since this limit is nothing to do with it apart from the indefinite permanence of its being-for-the-other: What could this limit be other than, precisely, one of the unrealizables ? What is it, other than a synthetic aspect of our reverse side ? Mortal represents the present being that I am for-the-Other; dead represents the future meaning of my current for-itself for the other.  It is really a matter, therefore, of a permanent limit to my plans; and, as such, this limit is to be accepted.  It is therefore an externality that remains as externality even in and through the for-itself’s attempt to realize it: what we defined earlier as the unrealizable to be realized .  There is no fundamental difference between the choice through which freedom accepts its death as its subjectivity’s elusive and inconceivable limit, and the one through which it chooses to be a freedom limited by the fact of the other’s freedom.  Thus death is not my possibility, in the sense defined previously; it is a limit-situation, as the chosen and fugitive reverse side to my choice.  It is not my possible, in the sense of my own end, informing me of my being; but by virtue of being the ineluctable necessity of existing elsewhere as an outside and an in-itself, it is internalized as what is “ultimate,” i.e., as the thematic meaning, out of reach, of the hierarchy of possibles.  In this way it haunts me in the very heart of each of my projects, as their ineluctable reverse side.  But, precisely as this “reverse side” is not to be accepted as my possibility but as the possibility of there no longer being any possibilities for me, it does not make a dent in me.  98 The freedom that is my freedom remains total and infinite, not because death does not limit it but because freedom never encounters this limit; death is in no way an obstacle to my projects but only a destiny, somewhere else , of these projects.  I am not “free to die,” 99 but I am a free mortal.  As death escapes from my projects because it is unrealizable, so I myself escape from death in my very project.  As something which is always beyond my subjectivity, there is no place for it within my subjectivity.  And this subjectivity does not assert itself against it but independently of it, even though this assertion is immediately alienated.  We cannot therefore think about death, nor can we await it, nor can we take arms against it; but at the same time our projects are, as projects—as a matter of principle, and not, as Christians say, because of our blindness—independent of it.  And, although there are countless possible attitudes in the face of this unrealizable that is to be realized “in addition to the bargain,” there is no reason to classify them as authentic or inauthentic, since, in fact, our death will always be “more than we bargained for.” 100 These various descriptions, bearing on my place, my past, my surroundings, my death, and my fellow man, do not claim to be exhaustive, or even detailed.  Their aim is simply to enable us to form a clearer conception of what a “situation” is.  Thanks to them, it will be possible for us to define more precisely this “being-in-situation” which characterizes the for-itself insofar as it is responsible for its way of being without being the foundation of its being.  (1) I am an existent in the midst of other existents.  But I can only “actualize” this existence in the midst of others, grasp the existents surrounding me as objects , and grasp myself as a surrounded existent, if I choose myself not in my being but in my way of being; only then can I even give a meaning to this notion of “ in the midst of .” The choice of this end is the choice of a not-yet-existing .  My position in the midst of the world, defined through the relation of the equipmentality or adversity of the things surrounding me to my own facticity—which is to say the discovery of the dangers I am risking within the world, the obstacles that I may meet with there, the assistance I may be offered—in the light of a radical nihilation of myself, and a radical and internal negation of the in-itself, brought about from the point of view of an end that I freely posit: that is what we are calling the situation .  (2) The situation exists only correlatively to a surpassing of the given toward an end.  It is the way in which the given that I am and the given that I am not are encountered by the for-itself that I am, in the mode of not-being it.  To talk about the situation is therefore to talk about “the position apprehended by the for-itself who is in situation.” It is impossible to consider a situation from the outside; it becomes frozen into an in itself figure .  In consequence, we can describe the situation neither as objective nor as subjective, even though the partial structures of this situation (the cup I am using, the table on which I am leaning, etc.) may and must be strictly objective.  The situation cannot be subjective , because it is neither the sum nor the unity of the impressions that things make on us: it is the things themselves , and myself among things, because the only effect of my arising within the world as the pure nihilation of being is to make it the case that there are things, and it adds nothing .  In this respect, the situation makes visible my facticity , which is to say the fact that things are there , simply as they are, without either the necessity or the possibility of being otherwise, and that I am there , among them.  But it cannot be objective either, in the sense of a pure given which the subject could observe without being in any way committed within the system thereby constituted.  In fact, by virtue of the given’s very meaning (a meaning without which there would not even be any given), the situation reflects the for-itself’s freedom to it.  If the situation is neither subjective nor objective, it is because it does not constitute an item of knowledge , or even an affective understanding of the state of the world through a subject; rather, it is a relation of being between a for-itself and the in-itself that it nihilates.  The situation is the subject in his entirety (it is nothing other than his situation) and it is also the “thing” in its entirety ( there is never anything more than the things).  It is, if you like, the subject lighting things up through his very surpassing—or it is things sending back to the subject his image.  It is the complete facticity, the absolute contingency of the world, of my place, my past, my surroundings, of the fact of my fellow man—and it is my freedom without limits, as that which makes it the case that there is a facticity for me.  It is this dusty, ascending path, this raging thirst of mine, this refusal of people to give me anything to drink because I do not have money, or am not from their country, or their race; it is my state of abandonment in the midst of these hostile populations, with this fatigue in my body that will perhaps prevent me from reaching the goal I had fixed for myself.  But it is also, precisely, this goal , not insofar as I formulate it clearly and explicitly but insofar as it is there, everywhere around me, as that which unifies and explains all the facts, and organizes them into a totality that can be described, rather than making of them a disordered nightmare.  (3) If the for-itself is nothing other than its situation, it follows that being-in-situation defines human-reality, by accounting at the same time for its being-there and its being-beyond .  Human-reality is, in effect, the being that is always beyond its being-there .  And the situation is the organized totality of being-there, as interpreted and lived in and through the being-beyond.  No situation, therefore, is privileged; by this we mean that there is no situation in which the given stifles beneath its weight the freedom that constitutes it as such—nor, conversely, is there any situation in which the for-itself is more free than in others.  This should not be understood in the sense of that “internal freedom” of Bergson’s, which Politzer mocked in La Fin d’une Parade Philosophique , 101 and which led simply to allowing the slave the independence of his inner life, and of his heart in chains.  When we assert that the slave is just as free in his chains as his master, we do not mean to talk about a freedom that remains indeterminate.  The slave in chains is free in order to break them ; in other words, the very meaning of his chains will appear to him in the light of the end he has chosen: to remain a slave, or to risk the worst in order to emancipate himself from slavery.  Of course, the slave will not be able to obtain the master’s wealth and standard of living; but it is also true that those are not the objects of his projects ; he can only dream of possessing those treasures.  His facticity is such that the world presents to him another face, and the problems he has to posit and to resolve are different; in particular, it is fundamentally on the ground of slavery that he is obliged to choose himself and, through that very act, to give a meaning to this obscure constraint.  If for example he chooses rebellion, then his slavery, far from being in the first place an obstacle to that rebellion, only gains its meaning and its coefficient of adversity through it.  Precisely because the life of the slave who rebels and dies in the course of his rebellion is a free life, precisely because the situation illuminated by a free project is full and concrete, precisely because this life’s urgent and crucial question is “Will I achieve my goal?”—precisely because of all that, the slave’s situation is incomparable with the master’s.  The meaning of each of them, in fact, is obtained only for a for-itself in situation, and on the basis of the free choice of its end.  A comparison could be made only by a third party and, in consequence, it could take place only between two objective figures in the midst of the world.  It would be established, moreover, in the light of the third person’s freely chosen pro-ject: there is no absolute point of view in which one could position oneself in order to compare situations that are different; each person actualizes just one situation: his own .  (4) As it is illuminated by ends which are themselves pro-jected only on the basis of the being-there that they illuminate, the situation presents itself as eminently concrete .  Of course, it contains and supports some abstract and universal structures, but it has to be understood as the particular face that the world turns toward us as our unique and personal opportunity.  We may recall Kafka’s allegory: a shopkeeper comes to the castle to plead his case; a fearsome guard blocks his entrance.  He does not dare to go further, waits there, and dies while he is waiting.  At the hour of his death, he asks the guardian: “How is it that I was the only one waiting?” And the guardian replies: “This door was made only for you.” 102 That is just how it is for the for-itself, if we are willing to add, moreover, that each person makes his own door .  The concrete aspect of the situation is shown in particular by the fact that the for-itself never aims at fundamental ends that are abstract and universal.  Doubtless we will see in the next chapter that the choice’s deep meaning is universal, and that the for-itself thereby makes it the case that a human-reality exists as a species.  It will still be necessary to extricate the meaning, which is implicit ; and for that we will make use of existential psychoanalysis.  And, once it has been extricated, the for-itself’s final and initial meaning will appear as an “ unselbstständig ” that, in order to be manifested, needs a particular concretion.  103 But the for-itself’s end, as it is lived and pursued within the project through which it surpasses and founds reality, is revealed to the for-itself in its concretion as a particular change in the situation it is living (to break one’s chains, to be king of the Franks, to liberate Poland, to fight for the proletariat).  And, further, it will not even be for the proletariat in general that, in the first place, one pro-jects to fight; instead, the proletariat will be aimed at through some concrete grouping of workers to which the person belongs.  The fact is that the end illuminates the given only because it is chosen as the surpassing of this given.  The for-itself does not arise with an end that is wholly given .  But, by “making” the situation, it “makes itself,” and vice versa .  (5) Just as the situation is neither objective nor subjective, it cannot be regarded either as the free outcome of a freedom or as the set of constraints that I undergo; it is a product of the constraint’s illumination by the freedom that gives the constraint its meaning.  Between brute existents, there can be no connection; the connections are founded by freedom, which groups them into structures of equipment, and it is freedom which projects the reason for the connections, i.e., its end.  But, precisely because I thereby come to project myself toward an end through a world of connections , I am able now to encounter sequences, connected series, structures, and I must determine myself to action in accordance with laws.  These laws, and the way I use them, determine the failure or the success of my endeavors.  But it is through freedom that the relations prescribed by law come into the world.  Thus freedom shackles itself within the world as a free project toward its ends.  (6) The for-itself is temporalization: therefore it is not ; it “makes itself.” It is the situation that must account for that substantial permanence which we are apt to recognize in people (“he hasn’t changed,” “he is still the same”) and which the person, in many cases, experiences empirically as his.  In fact my free perseverance in the same project does not imply any permanence, as we have seen; quite to the contrary, it is a constant renewal of my commitment.  However, the realities that are included within and illuminated by the project as it develops and is confirmed, present, on the contrary, the permanence of the in-itself and, to the extent that they transmit back to us our image, their perennial quality steadies us; frequently, we even take their permanence for our own.  In particular, the permanence of our place and surroundings, of our fellow man’s judgments about us, and of our past, figure a degraded image of our perseverance .  For the duration of my self-temporalizing, I am always French, a civil servant or a proletarian for the Other .  This unrealizable has the character of an invariable limit of my situation.  Similarly, what we refer to as a person’s temperament or character, and which is nothing but his free project insofar as it is-for-the-Other , also appears, to the for-itself, as an invariant unrealizable.  Alain saw quite clearly that character is a pledge .  The person who says “I am awkward” is making a free commitment to the anger to which he consents and, by the same token, a free interpretation of certain ambiguous details of his past.  In this sense, there is no character—there is only a pro-ject of oneself.  However, we should not fail to recognize the aspect of character that is “ given .” It is true that for the other, who apprehends me as an object-other, I am irritable, hypocritical or frank, cowardly or brave.  This aspect is transmitted back to me by the Other’s look: in undergoing this look, my character, which was a free lived project, conscious (of) itself, becomes something unrealizable to be accepted “ ne varietur .” 104 So it depends not only on the other but on the position I have taken up in relation to the other, and on my perseverance in maintaining this position: for as long as I allow the Other’s gaze to fascinate me, my character will represent to my own eyes the substantial permanence of my being as an unrealizable, “ ne varietur ”—as suggested by some banal sentences, uttered daily, such as: “I am forty-five years old, and I am not going to start changing today.” Often, the for-itself’s character is even what it attempts to retrieve, in order to become the in-itself-for-itself that it projects to be.  We ought nonetheless to note that this permanence of the past, of one’s surroundings, and of one’s character are not qualities that are given ; they show up on things only in correlation with the continuity of my project.  It would, for example, be pointless to hope that one might return after a war, after a long exile, to find some mountainous landscape unchanged and to found, on the inertia and apparent permanence of these rocks, one’s hope for a renaissance of the past.  This landscape will disclose its permanence only through a project of perseverance: these mountains have a meaning within my situation; they depict, in one way or another, my belonging to a nation at peace, and under its own control, which has a specific standing within the international hierarchy.  If I return to them after a defeat and during the occupation of part of the territory, they cannot present the same face to me at all: the fact is that I myself have other pro-jects and have committed myself in a different way within the world.  Finally, we have seen that internal upheavals of the situation, through autonomous changes in the surroundings, are always to be foreseen.  These changes can never induce a change in my project but, on the foundation of my freedom, they may bring about a simplification or a complication in the situation.  In consequence, my initial project will be revealed to me with more or less simplicity.  For a person is never either simple or complex: it is his situation that can be one of these or the other.  I am, in fact, nothing but my project of myself beyond a determinate situation, and this project sketches me out in advance, on the basis of the concrete situation just as, moreover, it illuminates the situation on the basis of my choice.  If therefore the situation as a whole is simplified—if rockslides, collapses, and instances of erosion have impressed on it a distinct appearance, with crude features and violent oppositions—I myself will be simple, because, as my choice—the choice that I am—is the apprehension of that situation there , it can only be simple.  New complications will have the effect, as they are reintroduced, of presenting me with a complicated situation, beyond which I will rediscover myself as complicated.  Anyone who was in a position to notice the almost animal degree of simplicity with which the prisoners of war returned, in consequence of the extreme simplification of their situation, will have observed this.  This simplification could not modify their project itself, in its meaning, but, on the foundation of freedom itself, it led to a condensation and uniformity of the surroundings which were constituted in and through a more distinct, more brutal, and more condensed apprehension of the captive’s fundamental ends.  In short, we are dealing with an internal metabolism, and not a global metamorphosis which would also affect the situation’s figure .  Yet these are changes that I encounter as changes “in my life,” i.e., as changes within the unitary framework of a single project.  III.  FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY Although the following considerations are of more concern to a moralist, we have judged that it may be profitable to return, after these descriptions and arguments, to the for-itself’s freedom, and to try to understand what the fact of this freedom represents for the destiny of humanity.  The essential consequence of our previous remarks is that man, being condemned to be free, carries the weight of the whole world on his shoulders: he is responsible for the world and for himself, as a way of being.  We are using the word “responsibility” in its ordinary sense of a “consciousness (of) being the incontestable author of an event or an object.” In this sense, the for-itself’s responsibility is overwhelming, since he is the one who makes it the case that there is a world, and since it is he, too, who makes himself be ; whatever the situation in which he finds himself, the for-itself has to accept this situation in its entirety, with its own coefficient of adversity, even if it is unsustainable.  He has to accept it with the proud consciousness of being its author because the worst disadvantages, or the worst threats from which my person is in danger, can have meaning only through my project, and they appear against the ground of the commitment that I am.  It is therefore foolish to think of complaining, since nothing alien has decided what we will feel, what we will live, and what we are.  Moreover, this absolute responsibility is not an acceptance: it is merely what the consequences of our freedom logically demand.  What happens to me happens to me through me, and I am unable either to assign it to myself, or to rebel against it, or to resign myself to it.  Besides, everything that happens to me is mine ; we must take this to mean in the first place that, as a man, I am always equal to what happens to me, because what happens to one man, through other men and through himself, can only be human.  The most atrocious war situations, the worst tortures, do not create an inhuman state of affairs.  There is no inhuman situation: it is only that, through fear, flight, and the recourse to magical modes of behavior, I can decide on the inhuman; but this decision is human and I will bear the entire responsibility for it.  But, in addition, the situation is mine because it is the image of my free choice of myself, and everything it presents me with is mine , as that represents and symbolizes me.  Am I not the one who decides on the coefficient of adversity of things, and even on their unpredictability, by deciding on myself? Thus there are no accidents in a life; an event in society that suddenly breaks out and drags me with it does not come from outside; if I am mobilized in a war, this war is my war, it is in my image and I deserve it.  I deserve it in the first place because I could always avoid it, through suicide or desertion: these ultimate possibles are those which must always be present to us when we envisage a situation.  Since I did not avoid it, I chose it; it might be through spinelessness, through cowardice in the face of public opinion, because I prefer certain values to that of actually refusing to make war (the esteem of those close to me, the honor of my family, etc.).  In any case, it is a question of choice.  This choice will be continually reiterated thereafter, right up to the end of the war; we must therefore concur with J.  Romains’s saying: “In war, there are no innocent victims.” 105 If, therefore, I have preferred war to death or to dishonor, it is just as if I bear the entire responsibility for this war.  Doubtless, other people declared it and we may be tempted, perhaps, to regard me simply as an accomplice.  But this notion of complicity has only a juridical meaning; it does not apply here, because it depended only on me that this war should not exist for me and through me, and it was I who decided that it would exist.  There was no constraint, because constraint can have no purchase on freedom; I had no excuse because (as we have said and repeated in this book) what distinguishes human-reality is that it has no excuse.  The only thing left for me to do, therefore, is to lay claim to this war.  But, in addition, the war is mine because, by the mere fact that it arises within a situation that I bring into being, and that I can encounter it there only by committing myself for or against it, I am no longer able now to distinguish the choice I make of myself from the choice I make of the war: to live this war is to choose myself through it and to choose it through my choice of myself.  There can be no question of regarding it as “four years of holiday” or as a “suspension,” or as an “adjournment of the session,” while my most important responsibilities lie elsewhere, in my conjugal, or familial, or professional life.  But in this war that I have chosen, I choose myself from one day to the next, and I make it mine as I make myself.  If it is to be four empty years, I am the one who bears the responsibility for that.  Finally, as we pointed out in the previous paragraph, each person is an absolute choice of himself on the basis of a world of knowledge and techniques which this choice accepts and illuminates at the same time; each person is an absolute, who possesses an absolute date and is unthinkable at any other date.  It is therefore irrelevant to wonder what I would have been if this war had not broken out, because I chose myself as one of the possible meanings of the period that was, imperceptibly, leading to war; I cannot be distinguished from that very period, and I could not be transported into any other period without contradiction.  Thus I am this war, which bounds and limits the period preceding it, and allows it to be understood.  In this sense, to define the for-itself’s responsibility more clearly, we need to add to the phrase that we quoted just now—“There are no innocent victims”—this one: “We get the war that we deserve.” In this way, wholly free, indiscernible from the period whose meaning I have chosen to be, and as profoundly responsible for the war as if I myself had declared it, unable to live anything without integrating it within my situation, committing myself to it entirely, and leaving my mark on it, I must exist without remorse or regret, just as I lack any excuse because, from the moment I arise in being, I carry the weight of the world that is mine on my own, without it being possible for anything or any person to alleviate it.  However, this responsibility is of a very particular type.  Indeed, someone might respond to me by saying “I didn’t ask to be born”—which is a naïve way of emphasizing our facticity.  I am indeed responsible for everything except my responsibility itself, because I am not the foundation of my being.  It is therefore just as if I were forced to be responsible.  I am abandoned in the world; this does not mean that I linger, passive and forsaken, within a hostile universe, like a plank floating on water, but, on the contrary, that I find myself suddenly alone and without aid, committed within a world for which I bear the entire responsibility, without being able—whatever I do, and not even for an instant—to separate myself from this responsibility, because I am responsible even for my desire to flee my responsibilities.  To make myself passive within the world, to refuse to act on things and on others, is still to choose myself, and suicide is one way among others of being-in-the-world.  However, I rediscover my responsibility as absolute, by virtue of the fact that my facticity—which is to say, in this case, the fact of my birth—eludes a direct grasp and is even inconceivable, because my birth never appears to me as brute fact but always through a pro-jective reconstruction of my for-itself: I am ashamed of being born or astonished by it, or I rejoice in it, or, by trying to take my life, I assert that I am living and I accept life in its badness.  Thus, in a certain sense, I choose to be born.  This choice itself is thoroughly affected by facticity, since I am not able not to choose; but this facticity, in turn, will appear only insofar as I surpass it toward my ends.  Thus facticity is everywhere, but it eludes me; I never encounter anything but my responsibility, which is why I cannot ask “ Why was I born?” or curse the day of my birth or assert that I did not ask to be born, because these different attitudes toward my birth—i.e., toward the fact that I actualize a presence within the world—are precisely nothing other than ways of accepting this birth, in full responsibility, and making it mine .  Here, too, I never encounter anything but myself and my projects, so that in the end my abandonment, which is to say my facticity, consists merely in my being condemned to be fully responsible for myself.  I am the being who is , as a being whose being is in question in his being.  And this “is” of my being is like something present and elusive.  In these conditions, since any event in the world can be disclosed to me only as an opportunity (an opportunity that can be put to use, missed, neglected , etc.) or, better still, since we can regard everything that happens to us as a chance —which is to say it can appear to us only as a means of actualizing this being that is in question in our being—and since others, as transcended-transcendences, are, in their case too, only opportunities and chances , the for-itself’s responsibility extends to the world in its entirety as a peopled-world.  That is precisely how the for-itself apprehends itself in anguish, i.e., as a being who is the foundation neither of its being nor of the other’s being, nor of the in-itselfs that form the world, but who is forced to decide on the meaning of being, within him, and everywhere outside of him.  Someone who actualizes, in his anguish, his condition of being thrown into a responsibility that stretches back even to his abandonment no longer has any remorse, or regret, or excuse; he is no longer anything but a freedom which is absolutely disclosed to itself, and whose being resides in this very disclosure.  But most of the time, as we pointed out at the beginning of this book, we flee from anguish in bad faith.  Praise “Sarah Richmond has now produced a meticulous, elegant translation.” —Jonathan Rée, London Review of Books “Sarah Richmond’s superb new translation… is supplemented by a wealth of explanatory and analytical material and a particularly detailed and insightful set of notes on the translation.… The first translation of Being and Nothingness was a major academic achievement that has influenced thought across a range of disciplines for more than sixty years.  This new edition has the potential to be at least as influential over the coming decades.” —Jonathan Webber, Mind “The publication of this excellent new English translation of L’Être et le néant is a welcome addition to the library of Sartre scholarship.… There is every chance that it will also attract nonspecialist readers to Sartre’s early philosophy and will thus importantly contribute to keeping existentialist thought alive in a context and era chronically bereft of genuine philosophical enlightenment.” —Sam Coombes, French Studies “Translating such a book is manifestly a labor of love—it was as much for Barnes as for Richmond, and generations of Anglophone Sartre scholars remain grateful to Barnes, even if, as I expect (and hope) it will, Richmond’s careful, thoughtful, and thought-provoking translation becomes the standard one for use by students as well as professionals.” —Katherine J.  Morris, European Journal of Philosophy “Sarah Richmond’s marvelously clear and thoughtful new translation brings Sartre’s rich, infuriating, endlessly fertile masterpiece to a whole new English-language readership.” —Sarah Bakewell, author of At the Existentialist Café “Sartre’s philosophy will always be important.  Being and Nothingness is not an easy read, but Sarah Richmond makes it accessible in English to the general reader.  Her translation is exemplary in its clarity.” —Richard Eyre “Sarah Richmond’s translation of this ground-zero existentialist text is breathtaking.  Having developed a set of brilliant translation principles, laid out carefully in her introductory notes, she has produced a version of Sartre’s magnum opus that—finally!—renders his challenging philosophical prose comprehensible to the curious general reader and his most compelling phenomenological descriptions and analyses luminous and thrilling for those of us who have studied Being and Nothingness for years.” —Nancy Bauer, Tufts University, USA “This superb new translation is an extraordinary resource for Sartre scholars, including those who can read the work in French.  Not only has Sarah Richmond produced an outstandingly accurate and fluent translation but her extensive notes, introduction, and editorial comments ensure that the work will be turned to for clarification by all readers of Sartre.  All in all, this is a major philosophical moment in Sartre studies.” —Christina Howells, University of Oxford, UK “A new translation of Being and Nothingness has been long overdue.  Sarah Richmond has done an excellent job of translating and clarifying Sartre’s magnum opus, making its rich content accessible to a wider audience.” —Dan Zahavi, University of Copenhagen, Denmark “With its scholarly introduction, up-to-date bibliography and numerous footnotes, Richmond’s fluent and precise translation will be an indispensable tool even for scholars able to read Sartre in French.” —Andrew Leak, University College London, UK “This fine new translation provides us with as crisp a rendering as possible of Sartre’s complex prose.  Richmond’s introduction, and a panoply of informative notes, also invite readers to share with her the intricacies of the task of translation and assist in grasping many of the conceptual vocabularies and nuances of this vital text.” —Sonia Kruks, author of Simone de Beauvoir and the Politics of Ambiguity Front Matter Au Castor About the Authors A BOUT THE A UTHOR Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) was one of the great philosophers of the twentieth century and a renowned novelist, dramatist, and political activist.  As a teenager, Sartre was drawn to philosophy after reading Henri Bergson’s Time and Free Will.  He passed the agrégation in philosophy at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris in 1929.  His first novel, La Nausée , which Sartre considered one of his best works, was published in 1938.  Sartre served as a meteorologist in the French army before being captured by German troops in 1940 and spending nine months as a prisoner of war.  He continued to write during his captivity and, after his release, published his great trilogy of novels, Les Chemins de la Liberté.  In 1964, Sartre was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature but declined it.  During the uprisings of 1968, he was arrested for civil disobedience but was swiftly released by President Charles de Gaulle, who allegedly said, “One does not arrest Voltaire.” Sartre died on April 15, 1980, in Paris, and his funeral attracted an enormous crowd of more than fifty thousand mourners.  He is buried in the Cimetière du Montparnasse in Paris.  Sarah Richmond is associate professor of philosophy at University College London.  Her research interests include twentieth-century French philosophy and applied ethics.  She has also published translations of essays by Emmanuel Levinas and several articles on the philosophy of Sartre.  SimonandSchuster.com www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Jean-Paul-Sartre www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Sarah-Richmond @AtriaBooks @AtriaBooks @AtriaBooks Conclusion CONCLUSION GT665 I.  IN-ITSELF AND FOR-ITSELF: SOME METAPHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS Now we may conclude.  In our Introduction, we discovered that consciousness is a call for being, and we showed that the cogito immediately refers us to a being-in-itself as the object of consciousness.  But after describing the in-itself and the for-itself it seemed difficult to establish a connection between them, and we were afraid of falling into an insurmountable dualism.  This dualism also threatened us in another way: to the extent that we were able to say, in effect, that the for-itself is, we found ourselves faced with two radically distinct modes of being, the being of the for-itself, that has what it is to be (i.e., it is what it is not and is not what it is), and the being of the in-itself, that is what it is.  We wondered then whether the discovery of these two types of being might not lead us to establish a hiatus, splitting Being (as a general category belonging to all existents) into two incommunicable regions, in each of which the notion of Being would have to be taken in an original and particular sense.  Our investigations have enabled us to answer the first of these questions: the for-itself and the in-itself are joined by a synthetic bond that is nothing more than the for-itself itself.  Indeed, the for-itself is nothing but the pure nihilation of the in-itself; it is like a hole within being.  We are familiar with the amusing story often used in popular science to illustrate the principle of the conservation of energy: if just one of the atoms constituting the universe were annihilated, they say, the result would be a catastrophe that extended across the entire world and which would mark the end, in particular, of the Earth and the stellar system.  We can make use of this image here: the for-itself appears as a tiny nihilation that originates within being; and this nihilation suffices to make a complete upheaval happen to the in-itself.  This upheaval is the world.  The for-itself’s only reality is to be the nihilation of being.  It becomes qualified only by virtue of its nihilating some individual and particular in-itself, not a being in general.  The for-itself is not nothingness in general but a particular privation; it is constituted as the privation of this being-here .  It is not therefore relevant to ask ourselves how the for-itself is able to unite with the in-itself, since the for-itself is in no way an autonomous substance.  Insofar as it is nihilation, it is been by the in-itself; insofar as it is an internal negation, it becomes acquainted through the in-itself with what it is not and, consequently, with what it has to be.  If the cogito leads necessarily outside itself, if consciousness is a slippery slope on which it is impossible to settle without being immediately thrown outside onto being-in-itself, that is because by itself, as absolute subjectivity, consciousness lacks any sufficiency of being; it directs us from the outset to the thing.  Consciousness has no being apart from this precise obligation to be a revealing intuition of something.  What does this mean, if not that consciousness is Plato’s Other ? We know the Stranger’s wonderful descriptions, in The Sophist , of this other that we can grasp only as a “sort of dream,” whose only being is its being-other—so that it can enjoy only a borrowed being—and which vanishes if we consider it in itself, to resume a marginal existence only if we direct our gaze on being, and which consumes itself in being other than itself, and other than being.  1 It even seems that Plato saw the dynamic characteristic presented by the other’s alterity in relation to itself, since—in some texts—he sees in it the origin of movement.  But he could have pressed on even further: he would then have seen that it was only in the capacity of consciousness that the other, or relative non-being, could have a semblance of existence.  To be other than being is to be a consciousness (of) self in the unity of the temporalizing ecstases.  And, indeed, what else could alterity be other than the to-and-fro of reflected and reflecting that we have described at the heart of the for-itself, since the only way in which the other can exist as other is by being conscious (of) being other? Alterity is, in effect, internal negation, and only a consciousness can constitute itself as internal negation.  Any other conception of alterity would amount to positing it as in-itself, i.e., to establishing an external relation between it and being, which would require the presence of a witness in order to observe the other to be other than the in-itself.  And, on the other hand, the other could not be other without emanating from being; in that respect it is relative to the in-itself, but it also could not be other without making itself other ; otherwise its alterity would become a given, and therefore a being that may be viewed as in-itself.  Insofar as it is relative to the in-itself, the other is affected with facticity; insofar as it makes itself, it is an absolute.  That is what we noted in saying that the for-itself is not the foundation of its being-as-a-nothingness-of-being but that it constantly founds its nothingness-of-being.  In this way the for-itself is an absolute that is “ unselbstständig ”—or what we called a “non-substantial absolute.” Its reality is purely interrogative .  If it is able to ask questions, it is because it is always in question itself; its being is never given but questioned , since it is always separated from itself by the nothingness of alterity; the for-itself is always in suspense because its being is constantly pending.  If it were able ever to join up with its being, alterity would disappear at the same time and, along with it, all possibles, knowledge, and the world.  Thus the ontological problem of knowledge is resolved by our affirmation of the in-itself’s ontological primacy in relation to the for-itself.  But that immediately generates a metaphysical questioning.  In fact we cannot compare the way in which the for-itself arises on the basis of the in-itself to the dialectical genesis of Plato’s Other on the basis of being.  For Plato, being and other are in fact genera .  2 But we have seen on the contrary that being is an individual adventure.  And, similarly, the for-itself’s appearing is the absolute event that visits being.  There is space therefore for a metaphysical problem here, which we can formulate like this: Why does the for-itself arise on the basis of being? Indeed, we can refer to the investigation of the individual processes by which this world here—as a concrete and particular totality—is born, as “metaphysics.” In this sense, the relation of metaphysics to ontology is like that of history to sociology.  We saw that it would be absurd to ask why being is and, in addition, that the question can have meaning only within the limits of a for-itself, and even requires that nothingness should be ontologically prior to being, whereas we have demonstrated the primacy of being over nothingness.  The question could be raised only as a consequence of contamination with a question that is externally analogous but nonetheless quite different: Why is it that there is being? But we know now that these two questions must be carefully distinguished.  The first is meaningless: all “why?” questions are in fact subsequent to being, and presuppose it.  Being is, without reason, without cause, and without necessity; the very definition of being presents us with its original contingency.  To the second question, we have already replied, because the domain in which it arises is not metaphysics but ontology: “there is” being because the for-itself is such that there is being.  Through the for-itself, being receives the character of a phenomenon .  But if questions about the origin of being or the origin of the world lack meaning, or receive their answer precisely within the field of ontology, the same does not hold for the origin of the for-itself.  The for-itself is such that, in fact, it does have the right to turn back to its own origin.  The being through which the “why” arrives in being has the right to ask its own “why,” since it is itself an interrogation, a “why?” To this question, ontology cannot reply, because here we are trying to explain an event, and not to describe the structures of a being.  At the most, ontology can point out to us that the nothingness that is been by the in-itself is not a mere void without meaning.  The meaning of the nothingness in nihilation 3 is to be been, in order to found being.  Ontology supplies us with two pieces of information that may provide a basis for metaphysics: first, that every process of self-foundation is a breach in the being-identical of the in-itself, a withdrawal of being in relation to itself, and the appearing of self-presence, or consciousness.  It is only by making itself for-itself that being might aspire to be its own cause.  Consciousness as the nihilation of being appears therefore as a stage in the progression toward an immanent causality, i.e., toward the being that is its own cause.  Only the progression stops there, owing to the for-itself’s insufficiency of being.  The temporalization of consciousness is not a progress leading up toward the dignity of the “ causa sui ” but a surface flow whose origin is, on the contrary, the impossibility of being its own cause.  In this way the ens causa sui remains as something missed , the sign of an impossible surpassing upward that conditions, through its very nonexistence, the flat movement of consciousness—just as the effect of the attraction exercised vertically on the ocean by the moon is the horizontal displacement of the tide.  The other clue that metaphysics may draw from ontology is that the for-itself is effectively the constant project to found itself as being, and the constant failure of this project.  Self-presence, with the various directions of its nihilation (the ecstatic nihilation of the three temporal dimensions, the twinned nihilation of the reflected-reflecting dyad), represents this project as it first arises; reflection represents the project’s duplication as it turns back on itself to found itself at least as a project and—through the failure of this project itself—an amplification of the nihilating hiatus; the cardinal categories of human-reality—“doing” and “having”—are reduced immediately or mediately to the project of being; finally, the plurality of “each and every one” 4 may be interpreted as a last attempt at self-foundation, which leads to the radical separation between being and the consciousness of being.  Thus ontology teaches us: (1) that, if the in-itself were to found itself, it could not even attempt to do so except by making itself consciousness, which is to say that the concept of “ causa sui ” carries within it that of self-presence, i.e., the nihilating decompression of being; (2) that consciousness is in fact the project to found itself, i.e., to attain the dignity of the in-itself-for-itself, or the in-itself-that-is-its-own-cause.  But we cannot get any more from it.  Nothing allows us to claim, at the level of ontology, that the nihilation of the in-itself into for-itself has as its meaning, from its origin and right at the heart of the in-itself, the project of being its own cause.  Quite to the contrary, ontology comes up against a deep contradiction here, since it is through the for-itself that the possibility of any foundation enters the world.  To be the project of founding itself , the in-itself would have in the first place to be self-presence, i.e., already to be consciousness.  Ontology must confine itself therefore to asserting that everything happens as if the in-itself, in a project to found itself by itself, modified itself into the for-itself.  The role of metaphysics is to form hypotheses that enable us to conceive of this process as the absolute event that comes to crown the individual adventure that is being’s existence.  It goes without saying that these hypotheses will remain hypotheses, since we can expect no further confirmation or disconfirmation.  Their validity will be determined simply by whether or not they enable us to unify the findings of ontology.  Naturally, this unification should not be constituted within the perspective of a historical becoming, since it is through the for-itself that temporality enters being.  It would therefore make no sense to ask what being was before the for-itself appeared.  But that does not make metaphysics any less obliged to try to determine the nature and the meaning of this process, which antedates history and is the source of all history, articulating the individual adventure (or the existence of the in-itself) with the absolute event (or the for-itself’s arising).  In particular, it will be for the metaphysician to decide whether or not movement is a first “attempt” on the part of the in-itself to found itself, and how movement as “being’s sickness” relates to the for-itself, as a more intense sickness, extending right up to nihilation.  The second problem, which we formulated as early as the Introduction, remains to be considered: if the in-itself and for-itself are two modalities of being , isn’t there a hiatus even within the idea of being, and isn’t our understanding of it split into two incommunicable parts, because its extension is constituted out of two radically heterogeneous classes? What is there in common, in fact, between the being who is what it is and the being who is what it is not and is not what it is? However, the conclusion to our preceding investigations can help us here; in fact we have just shown that the in-itself and the for-itself are not juxtaposed.  Quite to the contrary, the for-itself without the in-itself is something like an abstraction: it can no more exist than a color without a shape, or a sound without a pitch and a timbre; a consciousness that was conscious of nothing would be an absolute nothing.  But if an internal relation connects consciousness to the in-itself, doesn’t it follow that it becomes articulated with it to constitute a totality and that the title of being , or reality, belongs to that totality? Certainly, the for-itself is a nihilation but, in its capacity as nihilation, it is ; and it is a priori united with the in-itself.  In this way the Greeks used to distinguish cosmic reality, which they called τὸ πᾶν, from the totality constituted out of this and the infinite void that surrounded it—a totality which they called τὸ ὅλον.  5 Of course, we were able to call the for-itself a nothing and to declare that there is nothing “outside” 6 the in-itself, other than a reflection 7 of this nothing, which is itself polarized and determined by the in-itself insofar as it is precisely the nothingness of this in-itself .  But here, as in Greek philosophy, a question arises: What are we going to say is real , and to what will we attribute being ? To the cosmos or to what was called τὸ ὅλον above? To the pure in-itself or to the in-itself surrounded by that sleeve of nothingness that we designated by the name “for-itself”? But if we were to consider the total being to be constituted through the synthetic organization of the in-itself and the for-itself, would we not return to the difficulty we wanted to avoid? Won’t we encounter, this time within the existent itself, the hiatus that we detected in the concept of being? What definition should we in fact provide for an existent which, as in-itself, is what it is and, as for-itself, is what it is not? If we want to resolve these difficulties, we need to take note of what we demand of an existent in order to view it as a totality: its various structures must be held within a unitary synthesis, such that each one of them, considered separately, is only an abstraction.  And of course consciousness, considered separately, is only an abstraction, but the in-itself does not need, on its own account, any for-itself in order to be: the for-itself’s “Passion” only makes it the case that there is some in-itself.  Without consciousness, the phenomenon of in-itself is an abstraction but not its being .  If we were to conceive of a synthetic organization in which the for-itself was inseparable from the in-itself and, conversely, the in-itself was indissolubly linked to the for-itself, we would need to conceive of the in-itself as receiving its existence from the nihilation that makes us conscious of it.  What does this tell us, if not that the indissoluble totality of in-itself and for-itself is only conceivable in the form of the being that is “its own cause”? 8 This being, and no other, could have the value, absolutely, of the ὅλον we were just talking about.  And if we are able to raise the question of the being of the for-itself articulated to the in-itself, this is because we define ourselves a priori in terms of a preontological understanding of the ens causa sui .  Doubtless this ens causa sui is impossible and, as we saw, its concept contains a contradiction.  It remains no less true that, since we raise the question of the being of the ὅλον by taking up the viewpoint of the ens causa sui , it is this viewpoint that we should adopt in order to investigate the credentials of this ὅλον.  Indeed, doesn’t it owe its appearance entirely to the fact of the for-itself’s arising, and isn’t the for-itself originally the project of being its own cause? In this way we can begin to grasp the nature of reality in total.  Total being, whose concept would not be split apart by a hiatus and which, moreover, would not exclude the nihilating-nihilated being of the for-itself, and whose existence would be the unitary synthesis of the in-itself and consciousness—this ideal being would be the in-itself as founded by the for-itself, and identical to the for-itself who founds it; in other words, it would be the ens causa sui .  But precisely because we are taking up the viewpoint of this ideal being in order to judge the real being which we call the ὅλον, we are obliged to acknowledge that the real is an abortive effort to attain the dignity of the self-caused.  Everything happens as if the world, man, and man-within-the-world managed only to actualize a missing God.  Everything happens therefore as if the in-itself and the for-itself presented themselves in a disintegrated state, in relation to an ideal synthesis.  This is not because an integration has ever taken place but, on the contrary, precisely because it is always indicated and always impossible.  It is the constant failure that explains at the same time the in-itself’s indissolubility from the for-itself, and their relative independence.  Similarly, when the unity of the functions of the brain is disrupted, the resultant phenomena may present a relative autonomy and yet—at the same time—they can manifest themselves only against the ground of the disintegration of a totality.  It is this failure that explains the hiatus we encounter at the same time in the concept of being and in the existent.  If it is impossible to move from the notion of being-in-itself to that of being-for-itself and to reunite them within a common type, it is because the de facto passage from one to the other and their reunion are operations that cannot be performed.  We know for example that, for Spinoza and for Hegel, a synthesis that is arrested before the synthesization is complete—whose terms are frozen within a relative dependence and at the same time a relative independence—is constituted immediately into an error.  For example, the justification and the meaning of a semicircle’s rotation around its diameter are to be found, in Spinoza’s view, in the notion of the sphere.  9 But if we imagine that the notion of the sphere is by definition beyond our reach, the phenomenon of the semicircle’s rotation becomes false : we have decapitated it.  The idea of the rotation and the idea of the circle each remain, but without being able to unite within a synthesis that surpasses them and justifies them: each of them remains irreducible to the other.  That is exactly what is happening here.  We can say therefore that the “ὅλον” we are considering is—like a decapitated notion—in a state of constant disintegration.  And it is in its capacity as a disintegrated structure that we are presented with it in its ambiguity, so that we may emphasize the dependence of the beings in question, or their independence, as we please.  Here we have a passage that is not achieved, a short circuit.  We rediscover, at this level, that notion of the detotalized totality that we have already encountered in relation to the for-itself itself, and in relation to the consciousnesses of others.  But it is a third kind of detotalization.  In the case of reflection where the totality is simply detotalized, the reflective had the reflected to be and the reflected had the reflective to be.  10 The twofold negation remained evanescent.  In the case of the for-the-Other the (reflection-reflecting) that was reflected on was distinguished from the (reflection-reflecting) reflecting insofar as each of them had not to be the other.  11 In this way the for-itself and the other-for-itself constitute a being in which each of them confers being-other to the other by making itself other.  As for the totality of the for-itself and the in-itself, that is characterized by the for-itself making itself other in relation to the in-itself, but the in-itself is not at all, in its being, other than the for-itself: it is, purely and simply.  If the relation of the in-itself to the for-itself were the inverse of the relation of the for-itself to the in-itself, this case would collapse into that of being-for-the-other.  But it is precisely not so, and it is this lack of reciprocity that characterizes the “ὅλον” we were just talking about.  To this extent, it is not absurd to raise the question of totality.  When we studied the for-the-Other we noted in fact a “myself-Other” being that had the for-the-Other’s reflective scissiparity to be.  But at the same time, this “myself-Other” being appeared to us as being able to exist only if it brought with it an elusive external non-being.  We wondered at that point if the antinomic character of totality was in itself irreducible and whether we should postulate spirit as the being that is and that is not.  But it appeared to us that the question of the synthetic unity of consciousnesses lacked any meaning, because it presupposed that we were able to take up a point of view on the totality; yet we exist on the foundation of that totality, and are committed within it.  But if we cannot “take up a point of view on the totality,” that is because the other himself, as a matter of principle, denies his being me as I deny my being him.  It is the relation’s reciprocity that prevents me from ever grasping it in its integrity.  In the case of the for-itself-in-itself internal negation, on the contrary, the relation is not reciprocal and I am at the same time one of the terms in the relation and the relation itself.  I apprehend being, and I am an apprehension of being; I am only an apprehension of being.  And the being that I apprehend does not posit itself against me, in order to apprehend me in my turn; it is what I apprehend.  Only its being does not at all coincide with its being-apprehended.  In a sense, therefore, I can raise the question of the totality.  Of course, I exist here as committed within this totality, but I can have an exhaustive consciousness of it since I am at the same time a consciousness of being and conscious (of) myself.  Only, this question of the totality does not belong to the domain of ontology.  From the standpoint of ontology, the only regions of being it is possible to elucidate are those of the in-itself, the for-itself and the ideal region of the “self-caused.” For ontology, it is a matter of indifference whether we consider the for-itself in its articulation with the in-itself as a clear-cut duality or as a disintegrated being.  It is for metaphysics to decide whether it is more profitable for knowledge (in particular for phenomenological psychology, anthropology, etc.) to deal with a being that we can call the phenomenon , and which is endowed with two dimensions of being, the in-itself dimension and the for-itself dimension (from this point of view, there will be only one phenomenon: the world), as, in Einstein’s physics, it has been helpful to talk in terms of an event conceived as having spatial dimensions and a temporal dimension and determining its place in a space-time, or whether, despite everything, it remains preferable to preserve the old “consciousness-being” duality.  The only observation that ontology will risk here is that, should it appear useful to use the new notion of the phenomenon as a disintegrated totality, we would need to talk at the same time in terms of immanence and transcendence.  The pitfall, indeed, would be to fall into pure immanentism (Husserlian idealism) or into a pure transcendentism where the phenomenon is envisaged as a new type of object .  Rather, immanentism will always be limited by the in-itself dimension of the phenomenon and transcendence by its for-itself dimension.  After it has decided on the question of the for-itself’s origin and the nature of the phenomenon of the world, metaphysics will be able to approach various problems of the first importance, in particular that of action.  Action, in fact, needs to be considered at the same time at the level of the for-itself and at the level of the in-itself, because it concerns a project whose origin is immanent, and which determines a modification in the transcendent’s being.  There would be no point, indeed, to asserting that action modifies only the thing’s phenomenal appearance: if the phenomenal appearance of a cup can be modified to the point where the cup is annihilated as a cup, and if the cup’s being is not other than its quality , the action in question must be capable of modifying the cup’s very being.  The problem of action requires therefore the elucidation of the transcendent efficacy of consciousness and sets us on the path of its true relation of being with being.  It also reveals to us, in consequence of the act’s repercussions in the world, a relation between being and being which, even though the physicist apprehends it externally, is neither pure externality nor immanence but which refers us to the Gestaltist notion of figure .  From this point of departure, therefore, we may attempt a metaphysics of nature.  II.  MORAL PERSPECTIVES Ontology itself is unable to formulate moral prescriptions.  It is concerned solely with what is, and no imperatives can be derived from its indicatives.  However, it allows us to glimpse what an ethics that took up its responsibilities by confronting a human-reality in situation might be.  Indeed, it has revealed to us the origin and nature of value ; we saw that it is a lack , in relation to which the for-itself determines itself in its being as a lack .  By virtue of the for-itself’s existing , as we have seen, value arises to haunt its being-for-itself.  It follows that the for-itself’s various tasks may become the object of an existential psychoanalysis, since all of these aim to produce consciousness’s missed synthesis with being, in the guise of value or the being that is its own cause.  In this way existential psychoanalysis is a moral description because it conveys to us the ethical meaning of the various human projects; it points us to the necessity of abandoning a psychology based on interest, along with any utilitarian interpretation of human behavior, by showing us the ideal meaning of all of man’s attitudes.  These meanings lie beyond egoism and altruism, and also beyond those modes of behavior that we describe as disinterested .  Man makes himself man in order to be God, we may say: and, considered from this point of view, ipseity might seem to be a kind of egoism; but precisely because there is no common measure between human-reality and the cause of itself that it wants to be, we might just as well say that man loses himself in order for the self-caused to exist.  In which case all human existence may be regarded as a passion, and the all-too-familiar “self-love” will be only one means, freely chosen among others, of actualizing this passion.  But the foremost result of existential psychoanalysis must be to make us abandon the spirit of seriousness .  The spirit of seriousness has this dual characteristic: it regards values as transcendent givens that are independent of human subjectivity, and it transfers the character of being “desirable” from the ontological structure of things to their simple material constitution.  So for the spirit of seriousness, for example, bread is desirable because we must live (a value written in the intelligible sky) 12 and because it is nourishing.  The result of the spirit of seriousness (which, as we know) reigns over the world, is to make things soak up—like blotting paper—their symbolic values, through their empirical idiosyncrasy; it foregrounds the desired object’s opacity and posits it, in itself, as irreducibly desirable.  Therefore we are already within the domain of morality—but at the same time within the domain of bad faith, for it is a morality that is ashamed of itself and dares not speak its name; it has obfuscated all its goals, in order to escape from anguish.  Man seeks being blindly, hiding from himself the free project in which this search consists; he makes himself such that the tasks placed along his path await him.  Objects are silent demands, and in himself he is nothing but a passive obedience to these demands.  Existential psychoanalysis will acquaint him with the real aim of his search, which is being as the in-itself’s synthetic fusion with the for-itself; it will make him aware of his passion.  In truth, many men have practiced this psychoanalysis on themselves, and have not waited until they know its principles in order to use it as a means of deliverance and salvation.  Many men know, indeed, that the goal they are seeking is being and, to the extent that they possess this knowledge, they do not care about appropriating things for themselves, and try to actualize a symbolic appropriation of their being-in-itself.  But to the extent that this attempt is still bound up with the spirit of seriousness, and they continue to believe that their mission to make the in-itself-for-itself exist is written into things, they are condemned to despair, because they discover at the same time that all human activities are equivalent—for they all aim to sacrifice man in order that the self-caused may arise—and that all of them are doomed, by definition, to failure.  Thus, whether one gets drunk on one’s own or leads the people, it comes down to the same thing.  If either of these activities wins out over the other, it will not be because of its real goal but because of its degree of consciousness of its ideal goal; and in this case it may happen that the quietism of the solitary drunkard wins out over the pointless agitation of the leader of nations.  But ontology and existential psychoanalysis (or the spontaneous and empirical application that men have always made of these disciplines) must show the moral agent that he is the being through whom values exist .  At that point his freedom will become conscious of itself and discover itself in anguish as the unique source of value, and the nothingness through which the world exists.  As soon as the quest for being and the appropriation of the in-itself become disclosed as its possibles , freedom will apprehend, through and in anguish, that these are possible only against the ground of the possibility of other possibles.  But hitherto, even though possibles could be chosen and revoked ad libitum , the theme that unified all choices of possibles was the value or ideal presence of the ens causa sui .  What will freedom become if it turns back to face this value? 13 Will it carry it with it, whatever it does? Will the value it is trying to contemplate seize it back again, from behind, even in its turning back toward the in-itself-for-itself? Or will freedom instead, by the mere fact of grasping itself as a freedom in relation to itself, be able to bring to an end the reign of this value? Is it possible, in particular, for freedom to take itself as a value, insofar as it is the source of all value, or must it necessarily be defined in relation to a transcendent value that haunts it? And how should we understand the circumstance in which it is possible for freedom to will itself 14 as its own possible, and as its determining value? A freedom that wills itself as freedom is effectively a being-that-is-not-what-it-is and that-is-what-it-is-not which chooses, as being’s ideal, to be-what-it-is-not and to not-be-what-it-is.  It does not therefore choose to reclaim itself but to flee from itself, not to coincide with itself but always to be at a distance from itself.  How should we understand this being, whose wish is to stay at arm’s length, to be at a distance from itself? Is this a case of bad faith, or of some other fundamental attitude? And can this new aspect of being be lived ? In particular, will freedom, by taking itself as its end, escape from every situation ? Or will it, on the contrary, remain situated? Or will it become situated all the more precisely and individually by virtue of projecting itself more fully into anguish, as freedom’s condition, and by laying greater claim to responsibility, as the existent through whom the world comes to being? All of these questions refer us to pure, and not complicit, reflection.  They can be answered only within the domain of morality, to which we will devote a future work.  Chapter 1: The Immediate Structures of the For-Itself Chapter 1 GT109 THE IMMEDIATE STRUCTURES OF THE FOR-ITSELF I.  SELF-PRESENCE 1 From negation, we were led to freedom, and from there to bad faith, and bad faith has led us to the being of consciousness, as its condition of possibility.  We should then resume, in the light of the demands established in the preceding chapters, the description that we began in the Introduction to this book; we should return, in other words, to the field of the prereflective cogito .  But the cogito only ever delivers what we ask it to deliver.  Descartes inquired into its functional aspect: “I doubt , I think ” and, wishing to move (without any guiding principle) from there to the dialectic of existence, he fell into the error of substantialism.  Husserl, learning from this error, stayed timidly at the level of functional description.  In so doing, he never advanced beyond the pure description of appearance as such; he locked himself up in the cogito and he deserves—despite his denials—to be called a phenomenalist rather than a phenomenologist; and his phenomenalism constantly comes close to a Kantian idealism.  Heidegger, who wanted to avoid this descriptive phenomenalism—which leads to a Megarian 2 and anti-dialectical isolation of essences—embarks on the existential analytic 3 directly, without going through the cogito .  But if Dasein is stripped from the outset of its dimension of consciousness, it can never win it back.  Heidegger endows human-reality with a self-understanding, defined as an “ecstatic pro-ject” of its own possibilities.  And it is no part of our intention to deny this project’s existence.  But how should we conceive of an understanding that is not, in itself, conscious (of) being an understanding? If this ecstatic character of human-reality does not arise within a consciousness of ecstasis , it must collapse back into a blind and thing-like in-itself.  In fact the cogito has to be our point of departure, but it is fair to say—in parody of a well-known expression—that it can lead anywhere, provided that you can get out of it.  4 The sole purpose of our earlier investigation (which focused on the conditions of possibility of various ways of behaving) was to put us in a position where we could inquire into the cogito ’s being and to provide us with the dialectical instrument that might enable us to find a means, within the cogito itself, of escaping from instantaneity in order to approach the totality of being that constitutes human-reality.  Let us return, then, to our description of non-thetic consciousness (of) self; let us examine its results and ask what it means, for consciousness, necessarily to be what it is not, and not to be what it is.  “The being of consciousness,” we wrote in our Introduction, “is a being for whom in its being there is a question of its being.” 5 That means the being of consciousness does not coincide with itself in the fullness of adequation.  That adequation, which belongs to the in-itself, is expressed in this simple formula: being is what it is.  In the in-itself there is not a single particle of being with any distance from itself.  In the type of being hereby conceived, there is not even the slightest trace of duality; we can express this by saying that the in-itself has an infinite density of being.  It is plenitude.  We are able to characterize the principle of identity as “synthetic,” not only because its scope is limited to a particular region but above all because it gathers within itself the infinity of density.  “A is A” means: A exists in the form of infinite compression, in an infinite density.  Identity is the limiting concept of unification.  6 It is not true that the in-itself requires any synthetic unification of its being: at its extreme limit, unity vanishes and passes over into identity.  The identical is the ideal of the “one,” and it is through human-reality that the “one” enters the world.  The in-itself is full of itself and it is impossible to imagine a more complete plenitude, a more perfect adequation of any content to its container: there is not the slightest emptiness in being, not the slightest fissure through which nothingness might slip.  Consciousness is characterized, on the contrary, by its decompression of being.  Indeed, it is impossible to define it as self-coincident.  About this table here, I can say purely and simply that it is this table.  But if I am talking about my belief, I cannot confine myself to saying that it is a belief: my belief is a consciousness (of) belief.  It has often been said that the reflective gaze alters the fact of consciousness on which it is directed.  Husserl himself admits that the fact of “being seen” brings about a complete modification in each “ Erlebnis .” But we believe that we have shown that the primary condition of any reflexivity is a prereflective cogito .  Of course this cogito does not posit an object; it remains intra-conscious.  But that does not make it any the less homologous with the reflective cogito , insofar as it instantiates the basic necessity, for unreflected consciousness, that it should be seen by itself.  From the outset, therefore, it has this inescapable feature: it exists for a witness, even though this witness for whom consciousness exists is itself.  In this way, by virtue solely of the fact that I grasp my belief as a belief, it is no longer anything more than a belief , which means it is no longer a belief; it is a troubled belief.  In no case, therefore, can we take the ontological judgment “Belief is consciousness (of) belief” to be a judgment of identity: the subject and attribute are radically different, albeit within the indissoluble unity of the same being.  “So be it,” someone might say, but you are obliged to say at the least that consciousness (of) belief is consciousness (of) belief.  At this level, we rediscover identity and the in-itself; it was simply a matter of choosing the appropriate level at which to grasp our object.  But that is not true: to claim that consciousness (of) belief is consciousness (of) belief is to dissociate consciousness from its belief, to remove the brackets, and to turn belief into an object for consciousness: it involves a sudden leap onto the plane of reflection.  If consciousness (of) belief were only consciousness (of) belief, it would have to be conscious (of) itself as being a consciousness (of) belief.  The belief would become merely a transcendent and noematic feature of consciousness; in confronting this belief, consciousness would be free to determine itself as it pleased; it would resemble the imperturbable gaze which consciousness, in Victor Cousin’s account, casts over psychological phenomena, illuminating each of them in turn.  7 But Husserl’s analysis of the method of doubt made this fact clear: only a reflective consciousness can dissociate itself from what reflected consciousness posits.  It is only at the reflective level that an ἐποχή—a bracketing—can be attempted, and that we can refuse to “ mitmachen ,” as Husserl put it.  8 Consciousness (of) belief, even though it irreparably modifies the belief, is not distinct from it: it exists in order to perform the act of faith.  We have to acknowledge, therefore, that consciousness (of) belief is belief.  In so doing, we can grasp this twofold structure of referral at its source: consciousness (of) belief is belief, and belief is consciousness (of) belief.  In neither case can we say that consciousness is consciousness, or that belief is belief.  Each of these terms refers us to the other and passes over into the other, and yet each term is different from the other.  As we have seen, neither belief, nor pleasure, nor joy can exist before being conscious; consciousness is the measure of their being.  But it is no less true that belief, because it can only exist as troubled , exists from the outset as escaping from itself, as shattering the unity of all the concepts in which we might wish to enclose it.  Thus belief and consciousness (of) belief are one and the same being, whose characteristic is absolute immanence.  But the moment we want to grasp this being it slips between our fingers and we find ourselves confronted with the outline of a duality, with a play of reflections, because consciousness is a reflection.  But in fact, insofar as consciousness is reflection, it is also reflecting—and, if we attempt to grasp it as reflecting, it disappears and we find ourselves back with the reflection.  This reflection-reflecting structure has disconcerted those philosophers who have sought to define it by resorting to the infinite, either by positing, as Spinoza does, an idea-ideae that calls for an idea-ideae-ideae , etc., or by defining self-return, as Hegel does, as the “true infinite.” 9 But, in addition to freezing and obscuring the phenomenon, the introduction of the infinite into consciousness is no more than an explicative theory whose specific purpose is to reduce consciousness’s being to that of the in-itself.  If we accept it as it is given, the objective existence of the reflection-reflecting structure obliges us, on the contrary, to conceive of a mode of being different from the in-itself: not a unity that contains a duality, not a synthesis that surpasses and raises up the abstract moments of thesis and antithesis, 10 but a duality that is a unity, a reflection that is its own reflecting.  11 If we try to reach the total phenomenon—i.e., the unity of this duality, or consciousness (of) belief—we are referred immediately to one of its terms, and that term refers us in its turn to the unitary organization of the immanent.  But if, on the contrary, we want to set out from the duality as such, and to posit consciousness and belief as a pair, we will arrive at Spinoza’s idea-ideae and we miss the prereflective phenomenon that we wanted to investigate.  The fact is that prereflective consciousness is conscious (of) itself.  And it is this very notion of itself that we need to study, for it defines the very being of consciousness.  To begin, we should note that the term “in-itself”—which we have borrowed from tradition to refer to transcendent being—is inaccurate.  In fact, at the limit of self-coincidence, the “itself” vanishes, to make way for identical being.  The itself cannot be a property of being-in-itself.  It is in its nature reflexive , 12 as the syntax shows and in particular the logical rigor of the Latin syntax and the strict distinctions established in grammar between the uses of “ ejus ” and “ sui .” The term “ itself ” (or “himself”) refers, but it refers precisely to the subject .  It points to a relation of the subject with itself, and this relation is precisely a duality—but it is a special kind of duality, since it requires specific verbal symbols.  But, on the other hand, “itself” does not designate being—either as a subject or as a complement.  Indeed, if I consider the term “himself” in the phrase “he washes himself,” for example, I will observe that it opens up a space that allows the subject himself to appear behind it.  13 It is not the subject—since the subject without a relation to himself would be condensed into the identity of the in-itself—but neither is it anything solidly articulated within reality, since it allows the subject to appear behind it.  In fact, this himself cannot be grasped as a real existent: the subject cannot be himself because, as we have seen, where something coincides with itself, the “itself” disappears.  But neither can he not be himself, since the “himself” points to the subject himself.  The “himself” represents, therefore, an ideal distance, within the subject’s immanence, in relation to himself, a way of not being his own coincidence , of escaping from identity even while positing it as unity—in short, a way of being in a constantly unstable equilibrium between identity as a state of absolute cohesion without any trace of diversity, and unity as the synthesis of a multiplicity.  We may call this self-presence .  The law of being of the for-itself as the ontological foundation of consciousness is to be itself in the form of self-presence.  This self-presence has often been understood as a plenitude of existence, and a widely held prejudice among philosophers attributes to consciousness the highest dignity of being.  But, in the light of a more thorough description of the notion of presence, this postulate cannot be maintained.  In fact, any “ presence to ” implies a duality and thus at least a virtual separation.  Being’s self-presence implies a detachment on the part of being, in relation to itself.  The coincidence of the identical is the true plenitude of being, precisely because this coincidence leaves no space for any negativity.  Doubtless the principle of identity may call for the principle of non-contradiction, as Hegel saw.  The being that is what it is must be able to be the being that is not what it is not.  But in the first place this negation—like all negations—is brought to the surface of being by human-reality, as we have shown, and not through some dialectic that properly belongs to being itself.  And further, this principle can only refer to being’s relations with exteriority , since, precisely, it governs being’s relations with what it is not.  The principle we are considering here, therefore, is constitutive of external relations as they may appear to a human-reality present to being-in-itself and committed within the world; it does not concern being’s internal relations; those relations, insofar as they can be said to posit alterity, do not exist.  The principle of identity is the negation of any type of relation within being-in-itself.  On the contrary, self-presence presupposes that an intangible fissure has slipped inside being.  If it is present to itself, that is because it is not completely itself.  Presence is an immediate degradation of coincidence, because it presupposes separation.  But if we now ask what separates the subject from himself, we are forced to admit that it is nothing .  Ordinarily, something which separates is a distance in space, an interval in time, a psychological disagreement, or simply the individuality of two co-present items: in short, it qualifies reality.  But in the case we are concerned with here nothing can separate the consciousness (of) belief from the belief, since the belief is nothing other than the consciousness (of) belief.  The introduction of an external and qualified element from outside the cogito into the unity of a prereflective cogito would break its unity and destroy its translucency; there would be something in consciousness that it was not conscious of, something that did not itself exist as consciousness.  The separation that separates belief from itself cannot be grasped, or even conceived, on its own.  If we try to reveal it, it vanishes: we find ourselves back with belief in the form of pure immanence.  But if, on the contrary, we want to grasp the belief as such, the fissure is there—it appears when we do not want to see it, and as soon as we try to contemplate it, it disappears.  This fissure is therefore pure negativity.  A distance, an interval of time, a psychological disagreement, can be grasped in themselves and, as such, they contain elements of positivity; it is merely their function that is negative.  But the fissure within consciousness is nothing apart from what it negates, and it can have being only insofar as we cannot see it.  This negative, which is both a nothingness of being and a nihilating power, is nothingness .  In no other place can we grasp it in such unadulterated form.  Everywhere else we are obliged, in one way or another, to endow it, as nothingness, with being-in-itself.  But the nothingness that arises in the heart of consciousness is not .  It is been .  Belief, for example, is not a being that is contiguous with another being; it is its own self-presence, its own decompression of being.  Otherwise the unity of the for-itself would collapse into the duality of two in-itselfs.  Thus the for-itself must be its own nothingness.  The being of consciousness, as consciousness, is to exist at a distance from itself , as self-presence, and this zero distance that being bears within its being is Nothingness.  Thus, in order for an itself to exist, the unity of this being must involve its own nothingness, as a nihilation of the identical.  For the nothingness that slides into belief is its nothingness, the nothingness of belief as in itself belief, as blind and full belief, as “simple faith.” 14 The for-itself is the being that determines itself to exist, insofar as it is unable to coincide with itself.  We are able now to understand that our inquiry, without any guiding principle, into the prereflective cogito has not led us to find nothingness anywhere.  We cannot find or disclose nothingness in the way we can find or disclose a being.  Nothingness is always an elsewhere .  It is the for-itself’s obligation never to exist except in the form of an “elsewhere” in relation to itself, to exist as a being that is constantly qualified by its own inconsistency in being.  This inconsistency, moreover, does not involve another being; it is only a constant referral from itself to itself, from the reflection to the reflecting, from the reflecting to the reflection.  Nevertheless, this referral does not give rise to an infinite movement within the for-itself but is given in the unity of a single act: the infinite movement appears only to the standpoint of reflection, which aims to grasp the phenomenon as a totality and which is referred from the reflection to the reflecting, from the reflecting to the reflection, without being able to stop.  Thus, nothingness is this hole in being, this sliding of the in-itself toward the “itself” through which the for-itself constitutes itself.  But this nothingness can “be been” only if its borrowed existence is correlative to a nihilating act of being.  We may call this continual act through which the in-itself is degraded into self-presence the “ontological act.” Nothingness is the putting into question of being by being: that, precisely, is consciousness, or the for-itself.  It is an absolute event that is brought to being through being, and which—without having any being—is constantly maintained by being.  Since being in itself is isolated within its being by complete positivity, no being can produce being, and nothing can happen to being through being—other than nothingness.  Nothingness is being’s distinctive possibility and its unique possibility.  Even so, this original possibility can appear only in the absolute act of its actualization.  As nothingness is the nothingness of being, it can only arrive within being through being itself.  And, of course, it arrives in being through a particular being, which is human-reality.  But this being is constituted as human-reality insofar as it is nothing but the original project of its own nothingness.  Human-reality instantiates being insofar as it is, in its being and for its being, the unique foundation of the nothingness at the heart of being.  II.  THE FOR-ITSELF’S FACTICITY However, the for-itself is .  It is, as some may say, even if its way of being is such that it is not what it is and it is what it is not.  It is, because the project of sincerity, whatever stumbling-blocks it may run up against, can at least be conceived.  It is, as an event: in the sense in which I can say that Philippe II was , or that my friend Pierre is, and exists.  It is, insofar as it appears in a condition that it has not chosen, insofar as Pierre is a French bourgeois in 1942, insofar as Schmitt was a worker in Berlin in 1870.  It is , insofar as it is thrown into the world, abandoned in a “situation”; it is, insofar as it is pure contingency, insofar as we can ask, in relation to it—just as for things in the world, for this wall, this tree, this cup—the basic question: “Why is this being such and not otherwise?” It is, insofar as in it there is something of which it is not the foundation: its presence to the world .  Being’s apprehension of itself as not being its own foundation lies within every cogito .  In this respect, we should note that it is immediately encountered by Descartes’s reflective cogito .  Indeed, when Descartes wants to put his discovery to good use, he apprehends himself as an imperfect being, “since he doubts.” But within this imperfect being he notes the presence of the idea of perfection.  He recognizes, therefore, a disparity between the type of being he is able to conceive and the being that he is.  This disparity or lack of being lies at the origin of the second proof of God’s existence.  15 Indeed, if we set aside its scholastic terminology, what remains of this proof is a very clear sense that the being which possesses within it the idea of perfection cannot be its own foundation; otherwise it would have designed itself in conformity with that idea.  In other terms: a being that was its own foundation would not tolerate the slightest mismatch between what it is and what it conceives, for it would build itself in conformity with its understanding of being and would be able to conceive only of what it is.  Instead, this apprehension of being as a lack of being in the face of being is, from the outset, the cogito ’s grasp of its own contingency.  I think therefore I am.  What am I? A being who is not his own foundation, and who, insofar as he is a being, might be other than he is, to the extent to which he does not explain his being.  This is the primary intuition of our own contingency, cited by Heidegger as the primary motivation for our transition from inauthenticity to authenticity.  It is uneasiness, the call of conscience (“ Ruf des Gewissens ”), 16 the feeling of guilt.  In fact, Heidegger’s description is overly influenced by his concern to provide an ontological foundation for an Ethics in which he claims to take no interest, and also to reconcile his humanism with the religious meaning of the transcendent.  The intuition of our contingency should not be equated with a feeling of guilt.  It remains no less true that, when we apprehend ourselves, we appear to ourselves with the character of an unjustifiable fact.  But have we not—just now 17 —understood ourselves in terms of consciousness, i.e., as a “being that exists through itself?” How are we able to be—within the unity of a single arising into being—this being that exists through itself, as not being the foundation of its being? Or, to put it in other terms, how can the for-itself which—insofar as it is —is not its own being (in the sense in which it might be its own foundation) be the foundation—insofar as it is for-itself—of its own nothingness? The answer lies in the question.  If indeed being, as the nihilation of its own being, is the foundation of nothingness, that does not amount to saying it is the foundation of its being.  In order for something to found its own being, it must exist at a distance from itself; that implies a specific nihilation of both the founded being and the founding being, and a duality that is a unity: we are back with the case of the for-itself.  In brief, any endeavor to conceive the idea of a being that is the foundation of its being leads us, in spite of itself, to form the idea of a being that, contingent insofar as it is being-in-itself, is the foundation of its own nothingness.  The act of causation through which God is causa sui is—like any reclamation by something of itself—a nihilating act, to the precise extent to which the most basic relation is necessarily a return to itself , a reflexivity.  And this original necessity, in turn, appears on the foundation of a contingent being: the precise being which is in order to be its own cause.  As for Leibniz’s attempt to define the necessary on the basis of the possible—a definition that Kant took up—it is conceived from the point of view of knowledge, not from the point of view of being.  As Leibniz conceives it, the movement from possibility to being (a necessary being is one whose possibility implies its existence) registers the movement from our ignorance to knowledge.  Indeed, the possibility here can only be a possibility with respect to our thought, since it precedes existence.  It is an external possibility, in relation to the being whose possibility it is, since being follows from it in the way a consequence follows from a principle.  But, as we showed earlier, we can consider the notion of possibility under two aspects.  We can, in effect, turn it into a subjective index (it is possible that Pierre is dead means I do not know Pierre’s fate) and, in this case, it will be the witness, in the presence of the world, who determines what is possible: being’s possibility lies outside it, in the pure act of looking that weighs up its chances of being; possibility may indeed be given to us before being, but it is given to us , and it is not the possibility of this being; if the marble rolling across the rug is diverted by a fold in the material, that is no part of the marble’s possibility, and neither does the possibility of diversion belong to the rug; it can only be synthetically established by a witness, as an external relationship.  But possibility may also appear to us as an ontological structure of reality: in that case it belongs to some beings as their possibility; it is the possibility that they are , a possibility that they have to be.  In this case being maintains its own possibilities in their being, it is their foundation, and being’s necessity cannot therefore be derived from its possibility.  In brief, God—if he exists—is contingent.  Thus, the being of consciousness, insofar as this being is in itself in order to nihilate itself into the for-itself, remains contingent, i.e., consciousness does not have any capacity to give its being to itself, or to receive it from others.  And furthermore, as the ontological proof—like the cosmological proof—fails to constitute any necessary being, we cannot seek the explanation and the foundation of my being, insofar as I am a being like this , in necessary being: the premises “Anything contingent must be founded in a necessary being.  Now, I am contingent” show a desire for foundation, but not any explanatory connection to a real foundation.  In fact they could account not for this contingency here at all but only for the abstract idea of contingency in general.  And furthermore, they are concerned with value, not with fact.  18 But if being-in-itself is contingent, it becomes degraded into the for-itself by taking itself up.  It is, in order to lose itself in the for-itself.  In brief, being is and can only be.  But the possibility that properly belongs to being—and which is revealed in the act of nihilation—is to be the foundation of itself as consciousness, through the sacrificial act that nihilates it; the for-itself is the in-itself losing itself as in-itself to found itself as consciousness.  Thus consciousness owes its being-consciousness to itself, and it can implicate only itself insofar as it is its own nihilation: but that which annihilates itself to become consciousness—which cannot be described as the foundation of consciousness—is the contingent in-itself.  The in-itself cannot found anything; if it founds itself, that is by modifying itself to become the for-itself.  It is its own foundation insofar as it is already no longer in-itself, and here we encounter the origin of every foundation.  If being in-itself can be neither its own foundation nor the foundation of other beings, foundation in general enters into the world through the for-itself.  The for-itself does not only, as nihilated in-itself, found itself but, along with the for-itself, foundation appears for the first time.  Still, this in-itself, swallowed up and nihilated in the absolute event that is the appearing of foundation, or the for-itself’s arising, remains at the heart of the for-itself as its original contingency.  Consciousness is its own foundation but it remains contingent that there is consciousness rather than the pure and simple in-itself, extending to infinity.  The absolute event, or the for-itself, is contingent in its very being.  If I articulate what is given in the prereflective cogito I will observe, of course, that the for-itself refers to itself.  Whatever it is, it is in the mode of consciousness of being it.  Thirst refers to the consciousness of thirst that it is , as if it were its foundation—and conversely.  But, if it could be given, the “reflected-reflecting” totality would be contingent and in-itself.  But I can never reach this totality, since I can say neither that my consciousness of thirst is consciousness of thirst, nor that my thirst is thirst.  The totality is there as a nihilated totality, as the phenomenon’s evanescent unity.  If I grasp the phenomenon as a plurality, this plurality will indicate itself as a totalizing unity and it will thereby have the meaning of contingency.  So I can ask: Why am I thirsty? Why am I conscious of that glass? Or conscious of this Self? But as soon as I consider this totality in itself, it nihilates itself before my eyes.  It is not , it is in order not to be, and I am returned to the for-itself, apprehending it as it sketches out its duality as the foundation of itself: I am angry because I produce myself as a consciousness of this anger; remove this self-causation, constitutive of the for-itself’s being, and you will cease to encounter anything, not even an “anger-in-itself,” because it is in the nature of anger to exist as for-itself.  Thus the for-itself is supported by a constant contingency that it takes up, and assimilates, without ever being able to get rid of it.  We may call this constantly evanescent contingency of the in-itself—which haunts the for-itself and ties it to being-in-itself without ever allowing itself to be grasped—the for-itself’s facticity .  This facticity enables us to say that the for-itself is , that it exists , even though we can never actualize our facticity, and we always apprehend it through the for-itself.  We pointed out earlier that we can never be anything without playing at being it.  19 “If I am the café waiter,” we wrote, “it can only be in the mode of not being him .” And that is true: if I were able to be a café waiter, I would constitute myself all at once as a contingent mass of identity.  That is not how it is: that kind of being—contingent and in itself—will always escape me.  But in order for me to freely bestow a meaning on the obligations attached to my condition, it must be the case that, within the for-itself as a perpetually evanescent totality, being-in-itself as the evanescent contingency of my situation is, in some sense, given.  This becomes clear if we reflect on the fact that, although I have to play at being a café waiter in order to be one, it is also true that, however hard I try to play at being a diplomat or a sailor, I will not be one.  This inapprehensible fact of my condition, this intangible difference that sets apart the play-acting that actualizes something from play-acting tout court , explains why the for-itself, even while it chooses the meaning of its situation and constitutes itself in situation as its own foundation, does not choose its position.  It is the reason why I apprehend myself as being wholly responsible for my being, insofar as I am its foundation, and at the same time wholly unjustifiable.  Without facticity, consciousness would be able to choose its attachments in the world, in the manner in which souls, in The Republic , can choose their condition: I could decide to be “born working-class” or “born bourgeois.” But, on the other hand, my facticity cannot constitute me as being bourgeois or as being working-class.  Strictly speaking, my facticity is not even the resistance of facts, since it is by taking it up within the infrastructure of my prereflective cogito that I endow it with its meaning and its resistance.  My facticity is only an indication that I present to myself of the being I am obliged to keep company with, in order to be what I am.  It is impossible to grasp it in its brute nakedness, because we only encounter it when we have already reclaimed and freely constructed it.  The mere fact of “being there,” at this table, in this room, is already the pure object of a limiting concept, and we can only make contact with it as such.  And yet my “consciousness of being there” contains it, as its full contingency, as the nihilated in-itself against whose ground the for-itself produces itself as conscious of being there.  In sounding the depths of its own consciousness of being there, the for-itself can discover in itself nothing but its motivations , which means it will be constantly referred back to itself and to its constant freedom (I am there in order to…, etc.).  But the contingency that permeates these motivations—and just to the extent to which they entirely found themselves—is the for-itself’s facticity.  The relation between the for-itself—which, as for-itself, is its own foundation—and facticity can correctly be denominated a factual necessity.  And Descartes and Husserl grasped that factual necessity, precisely, as the source of the cogito ’s evidence.  The for-itself is necessary, insofar as it founds itself.  And that is why it can be the reflected object of an apodictic intuition: I cannot doubt that I am.  But as it is possible that this for-itself, as such, could not be, it has all the contingency of a fact.  Just as my nihilating freedom apprehends itself through anguish, so the for-itself is conscious of its facticity: it feels itself to be entirely gratuitous; it apprehends itself as being there for nothing , as being de trop .  We must not confuse facticity with that Cartesian substance whose attribute is thinking.  Of course, that thinking substance exists only insofar as it thinks and, as a created thing, it shares in the contingency of the ens creatum .  But it is .  It retains the character of in-itself in its entirety, even though the for-itself is its attribute.  This has been described as Descartes’s substantialist illusion.  For us, on the contrary, the appearance of the for-itself, or the absolute event, is the sign of an in-itself’s endeavor to found itself : it corresponds to an attempt, on the part of being, to remove contingency from its being.  But this attempt leads to the in-itself’s nihilation, because the in-itself cannot found itself without introducing the itself —a reflexive and nihilating referral—into the absolute identity of its being and without, in consequence, becoming degraded into for-itself .  The for-itself corresponds therefore to a destruction and decompression of the in-itself, and the in-itself nihilates itself and absorbs itself in its attempt to found itself.  The in-itself is not therefore a substance, of which the for-itself is an attribute, a substance able to produce thought without being exhausted in that very act of production.  It merely remains within the for-itself like a memory of being, as its unjustifiable presence to the world .  Being-in-itself can found its nothingness but not its being; in its movement of decompression it nihilates itself into a for-itself that, as for-itself, becomes its own foundation—but its in-itself contingency remains untouched.  It is what remains of the in-itself as facticity within the for-itself and it is the reason why the for-itself has only a factual necessity, why the for-itself is the foundation of its consciousness-being or existence , but cannot ever found its presence .  In this way, consciousness cannot ever prevent itself from being, and yet it is completely responsible for its being.  III.  THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE BEING OF VALUE Any study of human-reality must begin with the cogito .  But the standpoint of Descartes’s “I think” conceives of temporality in terms of instants.  Can we find, within the cogito , a way of transcending this instantaneity? If human-reality were limited to the being of the I think , its only truth would be the truth of an instant.  And it is quite true that human-reality is, in Descartes’s view, an instantaneous totality, since by itself it makes no claim on the future, and since it requires a continuous act of “creation” to pass from one instant to another.  But can we even conceive of the truth of an instant? And doesn’t the cogito engage in its own way the past and the future? Heidegger is so persuaded that Husserl’s I think is a fascinating mirage 20 by which we may get trapped that he avoids completely any recourse to consciousness in his description of Dasein .  His aim is to show Dasein in the immediate form of care , 21 i.e., as it escapes from itself in its project of itself toward the possibilities that it is .  He calls this project of the self outside itself “understanding” ( Verstand ), which allows him to establish human-reality as being “revealing-revealed.” But this attempt to begin by demonstrating Dasein ’s escaping from itself encounters insurmountable difficulties in its turn: we cannot eliminate the dimension of consciousness first , not even if we then reestablish it later.  An understanding can have meaning only if it is conscious of understanding.  My possibility can exist as my possibility only if it is my consciousness that escapes from itself toward it.  Otherwise the entire system of being and its possibilities collapses into the unconscious, i.e., the in-itself.  At this point we find ourselves thrown back toward the cogito .  That has to be our starting point.  Can we expand it, without losing what we have gained from it, i.e., the evidence of reflection? What has our description of the for-itself taught us? In the first place, we have encountered a nihilation that is assigned, by the for-itself’s being, to its being.  And this revelation of nothingness did not seem to go beyond the boundaries of the cogito .  But let us look more closely.  The for-itself cannot support its nihilation without determining itself as a lack of being .  The nihilation, therefore, cannot coincide merely with the introduction of a void into consciousness.  The in-itself has not been expelled from consciousness by any external being; instead, it is the for-itself that constantly determines itself not to be the in-itself.  In other words, it can found itself only on the basis of, and against, the in-itself.  Thus nihilation, as a nihilation of being, represents the original connection between the for-itself’s being and the in-itself’s being.  The material and real in-itself lies wholly present at the heart of consciousness, as that which it determines itself not to be.  The cogito ought to lead us necessarily to encounter this presence, complete and out of reach, of the in-itself.  And, of course, the fact of this presence just is the for-itself’s transcendence.  But the origin of transcendence, conceived as the for-itself’s original connection with the in-itself, is precisely nihilation.  In this way we can glimpse a way of getting out of the cogito .  And indeed we will see, later on, that the cogito ’s innermost meaning is that, essentially, of an expulsion outside itself.  But we are not yet ready to describe this characteristic of the for-itself.  What our ontological description has made immediately apparent is that this being founds itself as a lack of being, i.e., it becomes determined in its being by a being that it is not.  However, there are many ways of not being, and some of them do not attain the inner nature of the being that is not what it is not.  If, for example, I say of an inkwell that “it is not a bird,” the inkwell and the bird remain untouched by the negation.  The latter is an external relation that can be established only by a human-reality witness.  By contrast, there is a type of negation that establishes an internal relation between what we negate and what our negation applies to.  22 Of all the internal negations, the one that penetrates most deeply into being—the one that constitutes in its being the being to which its negation applies with the being that it negates—is the lack .  This lack does not belong to the nature of the in-itself, which is entirely positive.  It appears within the world only when human-reality arises.  Only within the human world can there be any lacks.  A lack presupposes a trinity: the item that is missing; that from which it is missing, or the existent; and a totality that is broken apart by the lack, and which could be restored by the synthesis of the missing item with the existent: that which is missed  manqué .  23 For human-reality, the being that is delivered to intuition is always that from which something is missing , or the existent.  For example, if I say that the moon is not full and that a quarter is missing from it, I make this judgment on the basis of a full intuition of a crescent moon.  Thus, what is given to intuition is an in-itself that is neither complete nor incomplete in itself but which is quite simply what it is , without any relation to other beings.  In order for this in-itself to be grasped as a crescent moon, a human-reality must surpass the given toward the project of the actualized totality—in this case, the full moon’s disc—and then return toward the given in order to constitute it as a crescent moon, or, in other words, in order to actualize it in its being, on the basis of the totality that becomes its foundation.  And in this same act of surpassing, the missing item will be posited as the item whose synthetic addition to the existent would reconstitute the synthetic totality of that which is missed  manqué .  In this sense the missing item shares a common nature with the existent: a reversal of the situation is sufficient for it to become the existent from which the missing item is missing, while the existent becomes the missing item.  This missing item, as the complement of the existent, is determined in its being by the synthetic totality of that which is missed.  Thus, in the human world , the incomplete being that is delivered to intuition as a missing item is constituted in its being by that which is missed  manqué , i.e., by what it is not.  The full moon is what endows the crescent moon with its crescent being; what is not determines what is; it is characteristic of the existent’s being—as the correlative to a human transcendence—to lead out of itself and right up to the being that it is not, which is its meaning .  Human-reality, through which lacks can appear in the world, must itself be a lack.  For it is only by means of a lack that a lack can come from being; the in-itself cannot be the occasion of a lack in the in-itself.  In other terms, in order for being to be either a missing item or something missed, it is necessary that some being should make itself its own lack: only a being from which something is missing can surpass being toward that which is missed  manqué .  The existence of desire as a human fact suffices to prove that human-reality is a lack.  How indeed can we explain desire if we try to see it as a psychological state , i.e., as a being whose nature is to be what it is? A being that is what it is (to the extent that we view it as being what it is) does not call for anything to make itself complete.  An unfinished circle only calls to be finished insofar as it is surpassed by human transcendence.  In itself it is complete as an open curve, and perfectly positive.  A psychological state whose existence had the sufficiency of that curve could not in addition make the slightest “call” for anything else: it would be itself, without any relation to anything other than itself; in order to constitute it as hunger or thirst, an external transcendence would be required, surpassing it toward the totality of “assuaged hunger,” as it surpasses the crescent moon toward the full moon.  We cannot get out of this difficulty by making desire into a conatus , conceived on the model of a physical force.  That is because, once again, even if we concede that it has causal efficacy, no conatus can possess, in itself, the qualities of an appetite in relation to another state.  As a producer of acts, the conatus cannot be identified with desire as something that calls for some state.  No recourse to psychophysiological parallelism can enable us to escape these difficulties: thirst as an organic phenomenon, as a “physiological” need for water, does not exist.  An organism deprived of water presents certain positive phenomena—for example, a certain coagulating thickening of the liquid blood—which in their turn provoke other phenomena.  Taken together, these amount to a positive state of the organism, referring only to itself; similarly, we cannot regard the thickening of a solution whose water evaporates as a desire, on the part of the solution, for water.  If we assume an exact correspondence between the mental and the physiological, that correspondence can be established only on the basis of an ontological identity—as Spinoza saw.  In consequence, the being of psychological thirst must be the being in itself of a state and we are directed, once again, to the transcendence of a witness.  But then the thirst will be a desire for that transcendence, and not for itself: it will be a desire in the eyes of the Other.  If desire must be able to relate to itself as a desire, it must itself be transcendence; i.e., it must be in the desire’s nature to escape from itself toward the desired object.  In other terms, it must be a lack—but not an object-lack, or a lack that is suffered, created by an act of surpassing that it is not: it must be its own lack of.… Desire is a lack of being, and is haunted in its innermost being by the being that it desires.  In this way, desire testifies to the existence of a lack in human-reality’s being.  But if human-reality is a lack, then it is through human-reality that the trinity of the existent, the missing item, and the missed  manqué  arises within being.  What are the three terms in this trinity, in point of fact? In this case, the element that plays the role of the existent is given to the cogito as the immediacy of the desire; for example, it is this for-itself, which we have grasped as not being what it is and being what it is not.  But what kind of being belongs to that which is missed  manqué ? To answer this question, we need to return to the idea of the lack, and to determine more precisely the connection between an existent and the item that is missing from it.  This connection cannot be mere contiguity.  If the missing item is so profoundly present—in its very absence—at the heart of the existent, that is because the existent and the missing item are apprehended and surpassed all at once, within the unity of a single totality.  And something can only constitute itself as a lack by surpassing itself toward a large, disaggregated form.  In this way the lack makes its appearance against the ground of a totality.  Moreover, it does not matter whether this totality was originally given, and has now been broken up (“the arms of the Venus de Milo are missing …”), or whether it has not yet ever been actualized (“What is missing in his case is courage”).  What matters is only that the missing item and the existent should be given or apprehended as needing to be annihilated within the unity of the missed  manquée  totality.  Any missing item is missing from … for … And what is given within the basic event of arising is the for , conceived either as not yet being or as no longer being: as an absence toward which the truncated existent, which is constituted by that very means as truncated, surpasses itself or is surpassed.  What is the for that characterizes human-reality? The for-itself, as the foundation of itself, is where negation arises.  It founds itself insofar as it negates of itself a certain being or way of being.  As we know, what it negates or nihilates is being-in-itself.  But not just any being-in-itself: human-reality is first and foremost its own nothingness.  What it negates or nihilates of itself, as for-itself, can only be itself .  24 And, as it is constituted in its meaning by this nihilation and by this presence within it—as the nihilated—of what it nihilates, human-reality’s meaning consists in the missed  manqué  itself-as-being-in-itself .  Insofar as human-reality, in its basic relation to itself, is not what it is, its relation to itself is not basic, and can derive its meaning only from an earlier relation: the null relation , or identity.  What allows us to grasp the for-itself as not being what it is is an “itself” that is able to be what it is; the relation that is negated in the definition of the for-itself—and which, as such, must first be postulated—is a relation, given as constantly absent, of the for-itself to itself, in the mode of identity.  The meaning of that subtle trouble through which thirst escapes from itself and (insofar as it is consciousness of thirst) is not thirst is a thirst that is able to be thirst, which haunts it.  What is missing from the for-itself is the “itself”—or its own self as in-itself.  Nonetheless, we should not confuse this missed in-itself with the in-itself of facticity.  Facticity’s in-itself, in its failure to found itself, is swallowed up into the for-itself’s pure presence to the world.  The missed in-itself, on the contrary, is pure absence.  In addition, the failure of the founding act will have made the for-itself arise out of the in-itself, as the foundation of its own nothingness.  But the meaning of the missed  manqué  founding act remains as something transcendent.  The for-itself is, in its being, a failure because it is only its own foundation insofar as it is nothingness.  In truth, this failure is its very being, but it can have meaning only if it apprehends itself as a failure in the presence of the being that it has failed to be, i.e., the being that could be the foundation of its being and no longer the foundation only of its nothingness, the being that is able to be its own foundation as self-coincidence.  The cogito refers, in its nature, to what it misses, and to what is missing from it, because—as Descartes clearly saw—it is a cogito haunted by being.  And such is the origin of transcendence: human-reality is its own surpassing toward what it misses; it surpasses itself toward the particular being that it would be if it were what it is.  Human-reality is not something that can exist first, in order to find itself, afterward, missing this or that item: it exists from the outset as a lack, and in an immediate synthetic link with its missing item.  In this way, the pure event through which human-reality arises in the form of presence to the world is its apprehension of itself as being its own lack .  Human-reality grasps itself in its arrival within existence as an incomplete being.  It grasps itself as being insofar as it is not, in the presence of the particular totality that is what it is, and that it misses, and that it is in the form of not being it.  Human-reality is a constant surpassing toward a self-coincidence that is never given.  If the cogito extends toward being, that is because it surpasses itself toward being, through its very elevation, by qualifying itself in its being as the being from which the self-coincidence needed to be what it is is missing.  The cogito is inseparably linked to being-in-itself, not like a thought in relation to its object (which would make the in-itself relative) but like something missing in relation to the thing that determines what it is missing.  In this sense, Descartes’s second proof is rigorous: imperfect being surpasses itself toward perfect being: the being that is the foundation only of its nothingness surpasses itself toward the being that is the foundation of its being.  But the being toward which human-reality surpasses itself is not a transcendent God: it lies at its own heart; it is only itself, in the form of a totality.  In fact, this totality is not the pure and simple contingent in-itself of something transcendent.  If the being toward which consciousness surpasses itself were grasped as pure in-itself, it would coincide with the annihilation of consciousness.  But what consciousness surpasses itself toward is not its annihilation; it does not wish to lose itself, at the limit of its surpassing, within the in-itself of identity.  The for-itself claims being-in-itself for the for-itself as such.  Thus this constantly absent being which haunts the for-itself is itself—but frozen into in-itself.  It is the impossible synthesis of the for-itself and the in-itself: able to be its own foundation, not as a nothingness but as being, and able to retain within it the necessary translucency of consciousness, at the same time as the self-coincidence of being in itself.  It will preserve, within it, the self-return that conditions every necessity and foundation.  But this self-return will occur without any distance; it will not in any way be a self-presence but, instead, a self-identity.  In short, this being will be exactly the itself , whose existence—as we have shown—can only be a constantly evanescent relation, but it will be that “itself” as a substantial being.  Thus human-reality arises as such, in the presence of its own totality or its own itself, as the lack of this totality.  And it is in the nature of this totality that it cannot be given, since, in it, the incompatible characteristics of the in-itself and the for-itself are gathered together.  And let nobody reproach us for freely inventing a being of this kind: when the being and the absolute absence of this totality are hypostasized—through an additional movement of mediation—as a transcendence beyond the world, it goes by the name of God.  And isn’t God both a being who is what he is, insofar as he is entire positivity and the foundation of the world—and, at the same time, a being who is not what he is and who is what he is not, insofar as he is conscious of himself, and is his own necessary foundation? Human-reality suffers in its being because it arises in being as constantly haunted by a totality that it is, without being able to be it, just because it could never attain the in-itself without losing itself as for-itself.  It is therefore in its nature an unhappy consciousness, without any possibility of surpassing its state of unhappiness.  But what exactly is this being, in its being, toward which the unhappy consciousness surpasses itself? Should we say that it does not exist? The contradictions in it that we have brought to light show only that it cannot be actualized or realized .  And nothing can defeat this self-evident truth: consciousness can exist only as committed within this being, which surrounds it from all sides and permeates it with its ghostly presence—this being that consciousness is, and which, however, is not it.  Should we say this being is relative to consciousness? That would be to confuse it with the object of a thesis .  25 This being is not posited by consciousness, and in front of it: there is no consciousness of this being, since it haunts our non-thetic consciousness (of) self.  It marks consciousness as the meaning of its being, and it is no more conscious of it than it is conscious of itself.  However, it cannot escape from consciousness either: rather, insofar as it brings itself to being as the consciousness (of) being, it is there.  And it is precisely not consciousness that confers this meaning on this being, as it does with this inkwell or this pencil: rather, without this being that it is in the form of not being it, consciousness would not be consciousness, i.e., a lack; on the contrary, it is from it that consciousness derives for itself its own significance as consciousness.  It arises at the same time as consciousness, in its heart and, at the same time, outside it.  It is absolute transcendence within absolute immanence; it has no priority over consciousness and nor does consciousness have any priority over it: they make a couple .  Doubtless it could not exist without the for-itself, but nor could the for-itself exist without it.  Consciousness maintains itself in relation to this being in the mode of being this being—because this being is consciousness itself—but as a being that it cannot be.  It is consciousness itself, at the heart of itself and out of reach, unrealizable and like an absence, and its nature is to contain its own contradiction within itself; its relation to the for-itself is a complete immanence that ends up as a complete transcendence.  We should not conceive of this being, moreover, as being present to consciousness with only the abstract characteristics we have established in our investigation.  A concrete consciousness arises in situation and is a particular and individualized consciousness of this situation and (of) itself in situation.  The “itself” is present to this concrete consciousness and every concrete characteristic of consciousness has its correlative within the totality of the itself.  The “itself” is individual, and it haunts the for-itself as its individual completion.  A feeling, for example, is a feeling in the presence of a norm, i.e., a feeling that is of the same type, but one that can be what it is.  This norm, or this totality of the affective self, is directly present as a lack that is suffered in the very heart of suffering.  We suffer, and we suffer through not suffering enough.  The suffering that we talk about is never quite the suffering that we feel.  What we call the “greatest” or “best” or “true” suffering—a suffering that moves us—is the suffering we can read on others’ faces or, better still, on portraits, on a statue’s face, on a tragic mask.  This suffering has being .  It presents itself to us as an objective and compact whole, which did not need our arrival in order to be, and which overflows our consciousness of it: it is there, in the midst of the world, and it persists, impenetrable and dense, like this tree or this stone; in short, it is what it is; we can talk about it as “that suffering there,” the suffering expressed by this rictus, or this frown.  It is supported and presented by the physiognomy but not created by it.  Upon it, the suffering, which is beyond passivity and activity, beyond negation and affirmation, has been placed: it is.  And yet it can be only in the form of self-consciousness.  We are fully aware that this mask does not express the unconscious grimace of somebody sleeping, or the rictus of somebody dead: it refers us to possibles, to a situation in the world.  The suffering is a conscious relationship to these possibles, to this situation, but made solid, and cast in the bronze of being, and it is as such that it fascinates us; it is like a degraded approximation of the suffering-in-itself that haunts our own suffering.  The suffering that I feel, on the contrary, is never suffering enough, because it nihilates itself as in itself, in the very act through which it founds itself.  It escapes itself as suffering toward my consciousness of suffering.  I can never be surprised by it, because it is only to the exact degree in which I feel it.  Its translucency deprives it of any depth.  I cannot observe it, as I observe the statue’s suffering, since I make it and I know it.  If I must suffer, I would like my suffering to take hold of me and overflow me like a storm: but, on the contrary, I am obliged in my free spontaneity to raise it into existence.  I would like to be it and at the same time to undergo it, but this huge and opaque suffering, which would transport me out of myself, continually brushes past me with its wing and I am unable to take hold of it; I can find only myself , my complaining, moaning self, the self who must, in order to actualize this suffering that I am, relentlessly put on the performance of suffering.  I wring my hands, or I shout, in order that beings in themselves—sounds and gestures—might race throughout the world, ridden by the suffering in itself that I am unable to be.  Every groan, every facial expression of the suffering person, aims to sculpt an in itself statue out of suffering.  But this statue can exist only through others, and only for others.  My suffering suffers from being what it is not, from not being what it is; just as it is on the point of catching up with itself it escapes from itself, and is separated from itself by nothing, by this nothingness of which it is itself the foundation.  My suffering chatters, because it is not enough—but its ideal is silence.  It is the silence of a statue, of the overburdened man who lowers his head and conceals his face without saying anything.  But it is for me that this silent man does not speak.  Within himself, he chatters inexhaustibly, because the words of his inner speech are like first drafts of the “itself” of his suffering.  It is in my eyes that his suffering “crushes” him: in himself he feels himself responsible for this pain that he wants, while he does not want it, and does not want, while he wants it—a pain that is haunted by that constant absence of the motionless and mute suffering that is itself , the concrete and unattainable totality of the suffering for-itself, the for of human-reality in its suffering.  26 As we can see, this suffering-itself, which attends my suffering, is never posited by the latter.  And my actual suffering is not an endeavor to attain the “itself.” But it can only be suffering as a consciousness (of) not being enough suffering, in the presence of that complete and absent suffering.  We are able now to determine the being of the “itself” more clearly: it is value.  In fact value has that twofold character—which moralists have barely begun to explain—of being unconditionally, and not being.  In effect, value possesses being, insofar as it is value; but, precisely insofar as it is encountered in reality, this normative existent has no being.  Its being is to be value, i.e., not to be being.  Thus value’s being, insofar as it is value, is the being of something that has no being.  Value seems, therefore, to elude us: if we take it as being, we run the risk of completely failing to recognize its unreality and, like the sociologists, turning it into a factual requirement among other facts.  In this case, the contingency of being kills the value.  But, conversely, if we look only at the ideality of values, we will deprive them of their being and, without any being, they collapse.  Of course, as Scheler showed, I can manage to intuit values on the basis of concrete examples: I can grasp nobility in a noble action.  27 But, apprehended in this way, value is not given as existing at the same level of being as the act that it renders valuable—in the way, for example, that the essence of “red” is related to a particular instance of red.  It is given as lying beyond the actions we consider—for example, as the limit to the infinite progression of all noble actions.  Value is beyond being.  However, if we are not to be led astray by words, we must acknowledge at the least that this being that lies beyond being does in some way possess being.  These considerations enable us to recognize that value arrives in the world through human-reality.  Now, the meaning of value is to be that toward which some being surpasses its being: any action that is valued separates itself from its being toward.… As value, always and everywhere, lies beyond every act of surpassing, it may be regarded as the unconditioned unity of all the surpassings of being.  And it thereby forms a pair with the being that surpasses its being from the outset, and through which surpassing enters being, i.e., with human-reality.  And we can also see that value, as the unconditioned “beyond” of all surpassings, must be the original “beyond” of just that being which does the surpassing, because only in that way can it be the original “beyond” of every possible surpassing.  Indeed, if every act of surpassing must be able to be surpassed, the being that surpasses must a priori be surpassed, just insofar as it is the very source of all surpassing; thus value in its origin—or the supreme value—is the “beyond” and the for of transcendence.  It is the “beyond” that surpasses and founds all my acts of surpassing, but toward which I can never surpass myself, precisely because my acts of surpassing presuppose it.  It is what is missed  manqué  by every lack, not what is missing from it.  Value is the “itself” insofar as it haunts the for-itself at its heart, as that for which it is.  The supreme value toward which consciousness surpasses itself at every moment through its very being is the absolute being of the “itself,” with its attributes of identity, purity, permanence, etc., and insofar as it is the foundation of itself.  This allows us to understand how value can, at the same time, be and not be.  It is like the meaning and the “beyond” of every act of surpassing; it is like the absent in-itself that haunts being for itself.  But as soon as we examine it, we can see that value itself surpasses this being-in-itself, since that in-itself is given to it .  It is beyond its own being, since—as its being enjoys self-coincidence—it immediately surpasses that being, with its permanence, its purity, its consistency, its identity, and its silence, as it lays claim to these qualities in its capacity as self-presence.  And reciprocally, if we start out by considering it as self-presence, this presence becomes immediately solidified and frozen into in-itself.  And furthermore, value is in its own being the missed totality toward which a being makes itself be.  It arises for any being not insofar as that being is, in its full contingency, what it is but insofar as it is the foundation of its own nihilation.  In this sense, value haunts being insofar as it founds itself and not insofar as it is: it haunts freedom .  So value’s relation to the for-itself is quite distinctive: it is the being that the for-itself has to be, insofar as it is the foundation of its nothingness of being.  And if the for-itself has this being to be, that is not because it is in the grip of some external constraint; nor is it because value—like Aristotle’s prime mover—exerts a de facto attraction over it; nor is it in virtue of some character it receives from its being; rather, it is because it makes itself be in its being as having to be this being.  In brief, the itself , the for-itself, and their relationship are at one and the same time held within the limits of an unconditioned freedom—in the sense in which nothing can make value exist, other than the freedom that simultaneously makes me exist myself—and within the boundaries of concrete facticity insofar as the for-itself, as the foundation of its nothingness, cannot be the foundation of its being.  Being-for-value , therefore, is characterized by a complete contingency which thereafter affects morality in its entirety, penetrating it and relativizing it—and at the same time by a free and absolute necessity.  28 Value, as it first arises, is not posited by the for-itself: it is consubstantial with it—to such an extent that no consciousness exists without being haunted by its value and, in its broad sense, “human-reality” includes the for-itself and value.  If value haunts the for-itself without being posited by it, that is because it is not the object of a thesis: for that, the for-itself would have to be a posited object in relation to itself, since value and the for-itself can arise only within the consubstantial unity of a pair.  Thus the for-itself, as a non-thetic consciousness (of) self, does not exist confronting value, in the sense in which, for Leibniz, the monad exists “alone, before God.” 29 Value is not therefore known at this stage, since knowledge posits its object and confronts consciousness with it.  Value is given only alongside the non-thetic translucency of the for-itself, which makes itself be as conscious of being; it is everywhere and nowhere, at the heart of the nihilating “reflection-reflected” relation, present and out of reach, lived simply as the concrete meaning of this lack that constitutes my present being.  In order for value to become the object of a thesis, the for-itself that it haunts must appear before the reflective gaze.  Indeed, reflective consciousness posits the reflected Erlebnis in its nature as a lack, and at the same time it brings value to light, as the unreachable meaning of what has been missed  manqué .  Thus reflective consciousness can properly be said to be a moral consciousness, since it cannot arise without at the same time disclosing values.  It goes without saying that I remain free, in my reflective consciousness, to direct my attention toward these values or to overlook them—exactly as it is up to me whether to look more closely at my pen or at my packet of tobacco on this table.  But whether or not these values become the object of detailed attention, they are .  We should not conclude from this, however, that value can appear only to the reflective point of view, and that we analogically project the values of our for-itself into the transcendent world.  If the object of intuition is a phenomenon belonging to human-reality, but a transcendent one, it is immediately disclosed with its value, because the Other’s for-itself is not a hidden phenomenon that might present itself only as the conclusion to an argument by analogy.  It is manifested from the outset to my for-itself and—as we will see—its presence as for-the-Other is a necessary condition of the constitution of the for-itself as such.  And value is given as the for-the-Other arises, just as it is given—although in a different mode of being—in the for-itself’s arising.  But we cannot discuss the way values are encountered objectively in the world until we have elucidated the nature of the for-the-Other.  We will defer our examination of this question, therefore, to Part Three of this work.  IV.  THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE BEING OF POSSIBLES 30 We have seen that human-reality is a lack and that, as a for-itself, it lacks a certain self-coincidence.  In concrete terms, some particular and concrete reality is missing from each individual for-itself ( Erlebnis ), whose synthetic assimilation would transform it into itself .  It is missing some … for … as the dented disc of the moon is missing some of what is required for it to be complete, and to be transformed into a full moon.  In this way, the missing item arises in the process of transcendence and is determined in a return to the existent, from the standpoint of what has been missed  manqué .  Defined in this way, the missing item is transcendent in relation to the existent, and its complement.  Its nature, therefore, is the same: the item that the moon’s crescent is missing, in order for it to be the moon, is precisely a part of the moon; the item missing from the obtuse angle ABC, in order to make two right angles, is the angle CBD.  What is missing therefore from the for-itself, in order for it to become integrated within the “itself,” is some for-itself.  But a stranger’s for-itself—in other words, a for-itself that I am not—would not work here.  In fact, since the ideal that has appeared is that of self-coincidence, the for-itself that is missing is a for-itself that I am .  But, on the other hand, if I were that for-itself in the mode of identity, the whole structure would become in-itself.  I am the missing for-itself in the mode of having to be the for-itself that I am not, in order to identify myself with it in the unity of the “itself.” In this way the for-itself’s initial relation of transcendence is constantly drafting something like a project of identification, in which the for-itself is identified with an absent for-itself that it is and that is missing from it.  What is given in the case of each for-itself as its own missing item —and which is strictly determined as missing from this precise for-itself, and none other—is the for-itself’s possible.  The possible arises from the depths of the for-itself’s nihilation.  It is not thematically conceived afterward as a means of uniting with the “itself.” But the for-itself’s arising as the nihilation of the in-itself, and as a decompression of being, gives rise to the possible as one aspect of this decompression of being, i.e., as a way of being at a distance from the “itself” that we are.  Thus the for-itself cannot appear without being haunted by value, and projected toward its own possibles.  However, the moment the cogito directs us toward its possibles, it chases us out of the instant and toward what it is, in the mode of not-being it.  But to understand more fully how human-reality is, and at the same is not, its own possibilities, we must return to this notion of the possible and try to elucidate it.  We can say the same about the possible as about value; we have the greatest difficulty understanding its being, because it presents itself as preceding the being whose pure possibility it is, and yet—at least as a possible—it surely must have being.  Do we not say: “It is possible that he will come?” We are willing, after Leibniz, to describe as “possible” any event that is not engaged within an existing causal series (such that we can determine it with certainty), and that does not contain any contradiction, either with itself or with the system we are dealing with.  Defined in this way, the possible is only possible with respect to knowledge, since we are incapable of affirming, or denying, the possible at hand.  It follows that there are two attitudes which we can adopt in relation to the possible: we can take the view, like Spinoza, that it exists only from the standpoint of our ignorance, and that, when our ignorance vanishes, the possible vanishes.  In this case, the possible is only a subjective stage on our path to perfect knowledge: its only reality is that of a psychological mode; it possesses concrete being insofar as it is a confused or truncated thought, but not as a property of the world.  But it is also permissible to make the infinite number of possibles, as Leibniz does, the object of thoughts in a divine understanding, which confers on them a kind of absolute reality; here, the power to actualize the best system within the possibles is reserved for the divine will .  In this case, although the sequence of the monad’s perceptions is strictly determined, and an all-knowing being is able—on the basis of the very formulation of his substance—to establish Adam’s decision with certainty, it is not absurd to say “It is possible that Adam will not pick the apple.” That means only that there exists, as a thought in the divine understanding, some other system of compossibles in which Adam appears as not having eaten the fruit of the tree of Knowledge.  31 But is this account so different from Spinoza’s? In fact, the possible’s reality is exclusively that of divine thought, which means its being is that of a thought that has not been actualized.  Of course the idea of subjectivity is taken to its limit here, because we are talking about a divine consciousness, not mine; and if we have taken care to merge subjectivity and finitude together from the outset, subjectivity will disappear once the understanding becomes infinite.  It remains no less true that the possible is a thought that is only a thought .  Leibniz himself seems to have wanted to bestow on his possibles an autonomy and a kind of weight of their own, since in many of the metaphysical fragments published by Couturat 32 we are shown the possibles organizing themselves into systems of compossibles and the fullest, richest system tending toward its own actualization.  But this is only the outline of a doctrine, and Leibniz did not develop it—probably because it could not be developed: to give the possibles a tendency toward being means either that the possible already consists of full being and has the same type of being as being (in the sense in which we can give the bud a tendency to become a flower) or that the possible at the heart of the divine understanding is already an idea-force and that the system organizing the maximum number of idea-forces automatically triggers the divine will.  But in this latter case we do not leave subjectivity.  If, therefore, we define the possible as non-contradictory, it can have being only as the thought of some being prior to the real world, or prior to any pure knowledge of the world as it is.  In both cases, the possible ceases to have the nature of a possible, and is absorbed into the subjective being of a representation.  But this being-represented of the possible cannot explain the possible’s nature, since, on the contrary, it destroys it.  In our everyday way of using it, we do not grasp the possible in any way as an aspect of our ignorance, or as a non-contradictory structure that belongs to some unactualized world in the margins of our world here.  The possible appears to us as a property of beings.  It is after I have glanced at the sky that I decree: “It is possible that it will rain,” and here I do not understand “possible” to mean “not in contradiction with the present state of the sky.” This possibility belongs to the sky like a threat, it represents a surpassing of the clouds that I perceive toward the rain, and this surpassing is borne by the clouds themselves—which does not mean that it will be actualized but simply that the structure of the cloud’s being is transcendence toward the rain.  Here the possibility is given as belonging to a particular being, of which it is a power , as can be seen quite clearly in the fact that we may equally say, about a friend we are waiting for: “It is possible he will come” or “He may come .” Thus the possible cannot be reduced to a subjective reality.  Nor does it precede the real or the true.  Rather it is a concrete property of realities which already exist.  For the rain to be possible, there must be clouds in the sky.  The attempt to eliminate being in order to establish the possible in its pure state is absurd: the frequently quoted procession, advancing from non-being to being and passing through the possible, does not correspond to reality.  Certainly, a possible state is not yet; but it is the possible state of a specific existent that supports through its being the possibility and the non-being of its future state.  There is an evident risk that these remarks will lead us to Aristotle’s “potentiality.” And we will be thrown from Charybdis onto Scylla if, by avoiding a purely logical conception of the possible, we fall back into a magical conception.  Being-in-itself can neither “be as a potentiality” nor “have potentialities.” In itself, it is what it is, in the absolute plenitude of its identity.  The cloud is not “rain as a potentiality”; it is, in itself, a particular quantity of water vapor that is—at a given temperature and pressure—strictly what it is.  The in-itself is in actuality.  33 But we can understand quite clearly how the scientific viewpoint, in its attempt to dehumanize the world, regarded possibles as potentialities and eliminated them by turning them into mere subjective outcomes of our logical calculation, and of our ignorance.  The first part of the scientific approach is correct: the possible arrives in the world through human-reality.  These clouds can change into rain only if I surpass them toward the rain, just as the moon’s dented disc is only missing a crescent if I surpass it toward the full moon.  But, after that, was it really necessary to turn the possible into a mere given of our psychological subjectivity? Just as there can be a lack in the world only if the lack arrives in the world through a being that is its own lack, so too can there be no possibility in the world unless it arrives through a being that is, in relation to itself, its own possibility.  But the essence of possibility is, precisely, its non-coincidence with the mere thought of possibilities.  In point of fact, if possibility is not given from the outset as an objective structure of beings, or of a particular being, thought—however we conceive of it—will not be able to contain the possible within it, as its thought content.  Indeed, if we reflect on the possibles that lie at the heart of the divine understanding, as the content of divine thought, we will see that they become pure and simple concrete representations .  Let us allow purely hypothetically—and even though we are unable to understand how a being that is entirely positive could acquire this negative power—that God has the power of negation, in other words that he can make negative judgments about his representations: even so, we will remain unable to grasp how he could transform these representations into possibles .  At the most, the effect of the negation would be to constitute them as “lacking correspondence in reality.” But to say that the Centaur does not exist is not at all to say that he is possible.  Neither affirmation nor negation can confer the character of possibility on a representation.  And, in response to the suggestion that a synthesis of negation and affirmation might produce this character, we can point out that a synthesis is not a sum, and that this synthesis has to be accounted for as an organic totality endowed with its own meaning, and not on the basis of the elements it synthesizes.  Similarly, the subjective and negative act of noticing our ignorance about the relation to reality of one of our ideas could not, on its own, account for that representation’s character of possibility: it could only place us in a state of indifference in relation to it, but it could not confer that right over reality which is the possible’s fundamental structure.  And, in response to the further claim that various tendencies incline me to prefer this outcome or that, we can say that, far from being explained by these tendencies, my transcendence is, on the contrary, presupposed by them: as we have seen, they must already exist as a lack.  And further, if the possible is not in some way given, these tendencies may induce us to wish that my representation adequately corresponds to reality, but they cannot confer on me a right over reality.  In brief, any apprehension of a possible as such presupposes an original surpassing.  Any attempt to establish the possible on the basis of a subjectivity construed as being what it is—i.e., as closed in upon itself—is necessarily doomed to fail.  But if it is true that the possible is an option on being, and if it is true that the possible can arrive in the world only through a being that is its own possibility, it follows that human-reality must necessarily be its being in the form of an option on its being.  Possibility is in play when, rather than being purely and simply what I am, I am as the Right to be what I am.  But this right itself separates me from what I have the right to be.  The right to property appears only when someone contests my property, when, in fact, it is in some aspect already no longer mine: my tranquil enjoyment of what I possess is straightforwardly a fact, and not a right.  For there to be a possible, therefore, human-reality must, insofar as it is itself, be something other than itself.  The possible is that element of the for-itself whose nature it is to escape from the for-itself, insofar as it is for-itself.  The possible is a new aspect of the nihilation of the in-itself into for-itself.  If the possible can arrive in the world only through a being that is its own possibility, that is because the in-itself—whose nature is to be what it is—cannot “have” any possibles.  Its relation to a possibility can only be established externally, by a being who is placed before the possibilities themselves.  The possibility of being stopped by a fold in the carpet belongs neither to the rolling marble nor to the carpet: it can arise only within a system in which the marble and the carpet are organized by a being who has an understanding of the possibles.  But this understanding cannot come from outside , from the in-itself, and it cannot be limited to being only a thought, as a subjective mode of consciousness: it must coincide with the objective structure of the being who understands possibles.  To understand possibility as possibility, or to be one’s own possibilities: these amount to one and the same necessity for the being in whom, in its being, there is a question of its being.  But to be one’s own possibility—i.e., to define oneself through it—is precisely to define oneself through the part of oneself that one is not; it is to define oneself as an escaping-from-oneself toward.… In brief, the moment I want to account for my immediate being insofar, quite simply, as it is what it is not and is not what it is, I am thrown back outside it, toward a meaning that is unreachable and which cannot in any way be identified with an immanent subjective representation.  In grasping himself through the cogito in the form of doubt , Descartes cannot hope to define this doubt as “methodic doubt”—or even just as doubt—if he limits himself to what the pure instantaneous viewpoint is able to grasp.  Doubt can be understood only on the basis of the constantly open possibility that a piece of evidence will “remove” it; it can be grasped as doubt only insofar as it refers to possibilities of the ἐποχή that are not yet actualized but remain open.  There is no fact of consciousness that can properly be said to be this consciousness—even if, like Husserl and somewhat artificially, we endow the internal structure of this consciousness with protentions 34 which, as they do not have in their being any means of surpassing the consciousness to whose structure they belong, will pitifully cave in on themselves and resemble flies who bang their noses against a window without being able to pass through the pane.  As soon as we want to define a consciousness as doubt, or perception, or thirst, etc., we are directed to the nothingness of what is not yet.  My consciousness (of) reading is not a consciousness (of) reading this letter, or this word or sentence, or even this paragraph—but the consciousness (of) reading this book , which in turn refers me to all the pages that are not yet read, and all the pages that are already read, and which, by definition, separates consciousness from itself.  A consciousness that was conscious only of what it is would be obliged to spell each word out.  In concrete terms, each for-itself is the lack of a certain self-coincidence.  In other words, it is haunted by the presence of that with which it would have to coincide, in order to be itself .  But as this coincidence in itself is also a coincidence with itself, what is missing from the for-itself, as the being whose assimilation would make it “itself,” is more for-itself.  We have seen that the for-itself is “self-presence”: what self-presence lacks can be missing from it only as self-presence.  The decisive relation between the for-itself and its possible is a nihilating slackening of the link involved in self-presence: this slackening reaches all the way to the transcendent, since the self-presence that is missing from the for-itself is a self-presence that is not .  Thus the for-itself, insofar as it is not itself , is a self-presence from which a certain self-presence is missing—and it is as lacking that presence that it is self-presence.  All consciousness is missing some… for .  But we must be clear that the lack does not come to it from outside, as the lack of the moon’s crescent comes to the moon.  The lack of for-itself is a lack that it is .  It is the draft of a self-presence, as something missing from the for-itself, that constitutes the for-itself’s being as the foundation of its own nothingness.  The possible is an absence that constitutes consciousness, insofar as it makes itself.  A thirst—for example—insofar as it makes itself thirst, is never enough of a thirst: it is haunted by the presence of the “itself,” or thirst-itself.  But, insofar as this concrete value haunts it, the thirst calls itself into question in its being, as missing a certain for-itself that would actualize it as a satisfied thirst , and would confer upon it being-in-itself.  This missing for-itself is the Possible.  It is not quite correct to say that a thirst aims at its own annihilation as thirst: no consciousness ever aims at its elimination, as such.  However—as we noted earlier—thirst is a lack.  As such, it wants to be satisfied , but the aim to satisfy this thirst, which might be achieved by the synthetic assimilation, in an act of coincidence, of the for-itself-desire (or thirst) with the for-itself-replete (or the act of drinking), does not aim at eliminating the thirst.  On the contrary, it aims at a thirst that has passed over into the plenitude of being, a thirst that takes hold of and incorporates the state of fullness, as Aristotle’s form takes hold of and transforms matter; it becomes eternal thirst.  The man who drinks to get rid of his thirst adopts a reflective point of view, which arises much later—like that of the man who goes to brothels to get rid of his sexual desire.  In their unreflected and naïve state, thirst and sexual desire seek to take pleasure in themselves: they seek the self-coincidence of satisfaction, in which thirst comes to know itself as thirst at the very moment when it is satiated by the act of drinking and when, precisely by becoming satiated, the thirst loses the character of a lack, even while making itself be thirst, in and through its satiety.  Thus Epicurus was right and, at the same time, he was wrong: on its own desire is, indeed, a void.  35 But no unreflected project aims merely to eliminate this void.  Desire tends by itself to perpetuate itself; man stands by his desires fiercely.  What desire wants to be is a void that has been filled in—but that informs its fullness, as a cast informs the bronze that was poured into it.  The possible that belongs to the consciousness of thirst is the consciousness of drinking.  Besides, 36 we know that it is impossible for the itself to coincide with itself, because the for-itself that is attained by actualizing a possible will make itself be as for-itself—i.e., within a different horizon of possibles.  Hence there is the constant disappointment that accompanies one’s state of repletion, the well-known “Is that all it is?”—which does not target the concrete pleasure of satisfaction but the evanescence of self-coincidence.  And here we can glimpse the origin of temporality, since thirst is—at the same time as it is not —its possible.  This nothingness separating human-reality from itself lies at time’s source.  But we will return to that.  What we must note is that the for-itself is separated from the self-presence that is missing from it and which is its own possibility; it is separated, in one sense, by nothing and, in another sense, by the totality of the existent in the world, insofar as the missing for-itself or possible is for-itself in the form of presence to a specific worldly state.  In this sense, the being beyond which the for-itself projects its coincidence with itself is the world, or the infinite distance in being, beyond which man will be reunited with his possible.  Let us call the for-itself’s relation to the possible that it is the “ circuit of ipseity ” 37 —and the totality of being, insofar as it is traversed by the circuit of ipseity, the “ world .” We are able now to clarify the possible’s mode of being.  The possible is that which the for-itself is missing some of… for being itself.  In consequence, we should not say that, as a possible, the possible is —unless what we mean by “is” is the being of an existent who “ is been ” insofar as it is not been or, alternatively, the appearance, at a distance, of what I am.  The possible does not exist merely as a representation—not even a negated one—but as a real lack of being which, as a lack, is beyond being.  It has the being of a lack and, as a lack, being is missing from it.  The possible is not; the possible possibilizes itself 38 and, to the precise extent to which the for-itself makes itself be, it determines, by schematically outlining it, the site of a nothingness that the for-itself is, beyond itself.  Naturally it is not in the first instance posited thematically: it is merely outlined beyond the world, and it gives my present perception its meaning, insofar as my perception grasps the world within the circuit of ipseity.  But neither is it unknown or unconscious: it sketches out the limits of my non-thetic consciousness (of) self as a non-thetic consciousness.  An unreflected consciousness (of) thirst is an apprehension of the glass of water as desirable, in which the self is not centripetally posited as the goal of the desire.  Instead, the possible state of repletion appears as the non-positional correlate of my non-thetic consciousness (of) self, at the horizon of the glass-in-the-midst-of-the-world.  V.  MY SELF AND THE CIRCUIT OF IPSEITY I tried to show, in an article in Recherches Philosophiques , that the Ego does not belong to the domain of the for-itself.  39 We do not need to return to that.  Let us merely note the reason for the Ego’s transcendence: as the unifying pole of the “ Erlebnisse ,” the Ego is in-itself, not for-itself.  40 If it were “of consciousness,” it would be its own foundation of itself, within the translucency of the immediate.  But in that case it would be what it was not, and would not be what it was—which is not the mode of being of the “I.” In fact, my consciousness of my “I” can never exhaust it, and neither does it bring it into existence: the “I” is always given as having been there first and, at the same time, as possessing depths that will gradually be disclosed.  In this way, the Ego appears to consciousness as a transcendent in-itself, as an existent of the human world and not as something of consciousness.  41 But it would be a mistake to conclude that the for-itself is purely and simply an “impersonal” contemplation.  It is simply that, far from the Ego being the personalizing pole of a consciousness that would, without it, remain at the impersonal stage, it is consciousness, on the contrary that, in its fundamental ipseity, enables the Ego to appear in certain conditions as the transcendent phenomenon of that ipseity.  In fact, as we have seen, it is not possible to say, of the in-itself, that it is itself .  It is , quite simply.  And similarly, we should say of the “I”—which is quite incorrectly regarded as an inhabitant of consciousness—that it is the “Me” of consciousness, but not that it is its own self or itself .  42 Thus, by hypostasizing the for-itself’s reflected-being into an in-itself, we freeze and destroy the movement of reflection on the self: consciousness will refer purely to the Ego as its self , but the Ego will no longer refer to anything; the relation of reflection has been transformed into a simple centripetal relation whose center, moreover, is an opaque node.  We have shown, on the contrary that, by definition, no self or itself can inhabit consciousness.  43 It is, if you like, the reason for the infinite movement through which the reflection refers to the reflecting, and this latter to the reflection; it is by definition an ideal, a limit.  And what makes it arise as a limit is the nihilating reality of being’s presence to being, as a type of being within the unity of being.  In this way, consciousness, from the moment it arises, makes itself personal through the pure nihilating movement of reflection: for it is not the possession of an Ego—which is only the sign of a personality—that confers personal existence on a being but rather the fact of existing for oneself as self-presence.  But, in addition, this first reflective movement leads to a second movement, to ipseity.  Within ipseity, my possible casts its reflection onto my consciousness and defines it as what it is.  Ipseity represents a degree of nihilation that goes further than the pure self-presence of the prereflective cogito , insofar as the possible that I am is not a presence to the for-itself (in the way that the reflection relates to the reflecting) but is a presence-absence .  But this underlines the existence of referral as the structure of the for-itself’s being even more clearly.  The for-itself is itself over there , out of reach, in the distance of its possibilities.  And this free necessity to be over there what one is, in the form of a lack, is what constitutes ipseity, or the second essential aspect of a person.  And how indeed should we define a person, other than as a free relationship to himself? As for the world—i.e., the totality of beings as they exist within the circuit of ipseity—it cannot be anything but what human-reality surpasses toward itself or, to borrow Heidegger’s definition: “That on the basis of which human-reality becomes acquainted with what it is.” 44 In effect, the possible that is my possible is a possible for-itself and, as such, it is present to the in-itself as consciousness of the in-itself.  In confronting the world, what I seek is to coincide with a for-itself that I am, which is a consciousness of the world.  But this possible, which is non-thetically present-absent to my present consciousness, is not present like an object of positional consciousness—otherwise it would be reflected.  The satisfied thirst that haunts my current thirst is not a consciousness (of) self as a satisfied thirst: it is a thetic consciousness of the glass-being-drunk-from and a non-positional consciousness (of) self.  It is therefore transcended toward the glass of which it is conscious and, as the correlative of this possible non-thetic consciousness, the glass-drunk-from haunts the full glass as its possible and constitutes it as a glass for drinking from.  Thus the world, in its nature, is mine insofar as it is the in-itself correlative of nothingness; in other words, the correlative of the necessary obstacle, beyond which I rediscover myself as what I am in the form of “having it to be.” Without the world there would be no ipseity, and no person; without ipseity, and without the person, there would be no world.  But the world’s belonging to the person is never posited at the level of the prereflective cogito .  It would be absurd to say that the world, insofar as it is known, is known as mine.  And yet this “mine-ness” of the world is a fugitive and ever present structure that I live .  The world ( is ) mine because it is haunted by possibles, of which the possible acts of consciousness (of) self that I am are conscious, and it is these possibles as such that give the world its unity and its meaning as a world.  45 Our examination of negative forms of behavior and of bad faith has allowed us to make a start on the ontological study of the cogito , and the cogito ’s being has appeared to us as being-for-itself.  Before our eyes, this being has transcended itself, toward value and toward its possibles; we have not been able to contain it within the substantialist limits of instantaneity that belong to Descartes’s cogito .  But, precisely for that reason, we cannot be content with the results we have just obtained: if the cogito rejects instantaneity, and if it transcends itself toward its possibles, a temporal surpassing is required.  It is “in time” that the for-itself is its own possibles in the mode of “not being”; it is in time that my possibles appear at the horizon of the world which they make into “mine.” If, therefore, human-reality grasps itself as temporal, and if the meaning of its transcendence is its temporality, we cannot hope to elucidate the for-itself’s being until we have described and established the meaning of the Temporal.  It is only then that we will be able to turn to the problem that concerns us: the problem of consciousness’s original relation to being.  Chapter 3: Transcendence Chapter 3 GT207 TRANSCENDENCE To arrive at as complete a description of the for-itself as we can, we chose the investigation of negative forms of behavior as our guiding thread.  As we saw, it is the permanent possibility of non-being, outside us and within us, that conditions the questions we are able to ask, and the answers we can give them.  But our primary aim was not only to disclose the for-itself’s negative structures.  In our Introduction, we encountered a problem, and that problem is what we wished to resolve: what is human-reality’s original relation to the being of phenomena, or being-in-itself? And we have been obliged to reject, in our Introduction and thereafter, the realist solution and the idealist solution.  It seemed to us that transcendent being could not act in any way upon consciousness and, at the same time, that consciousness could not “construct” anything transcendent by objectifying elements borrowed from its subjectivity.  Subsequently, we came to understand that the original relationship to being could not be the kind of external relation that joins two primitively isolated substances.  “The relation of the regions of being is a primordial bursting forth,” we said, “which forms part of the very structure of these beings.” 1 What showed itself to be concrete was the synthetic totality, of which consciousness and the phenomenon only constitute articulations.  But if, in one sense, consciousness considered in isolation is an abstraction, and if the phenomena—and even the phenomenon of being—are similarly abstract, insofar as they cannot exist as phenomena without appearing to a consciousness, we cannot regard the being of phenomena, as in-itself that is what it is, as an abstraction.  To be, it needs nothing but itself; it refers only to itself.  Our description of the for-itself, on the other hand, showed it to be, on the contrary, as far removed as possible from a substance and from the in-itself: we saw that the for-itself is its own nihilation, and that only within the ontological unity of its ecstases is it possible for it to be.  If, therefore, the for-itself’s relation to the in-itself must from the outset constitute the very being that enters into relation, we should take this to mean not that it constitutes the in-itself but, instead, the for-itself.  It is within the for-itself alone that we must seek the key to that relation to being, for example, that goes by the name “knowledge.” The for-itself is responsible in its being for its relation with the in-itself or, alternatively, it produces itself from the very beginning on the foundation of a relation to the in-itself.  This we had already foreseen when we defined consciousness as “a being for whom in its being there is a question of its being, insofar as this being implies a being other than itself.” 2 But since we formulated that definition we have acquired new knowledge.  In particular, we have grasped the for-itself’s innermost meaning, as the foundation of its own nothingness.  Is now not the time for us to make use of this knowledge to determine and to explicate this ecstatic relation of the for-itself to the in-itself, on whose foundation it is possible for knowledge and action in general to appear? Do we not have what we need to answer our initial question? In order to be a non-thetic consciousness (of) self, consciousness must be thetically conscious of something, as we noted.  Now, so far, we have studied the for-itself as the original mode of being of any non-thetic consciousness (of) self.  Were we not led, in doing just that, to describe the for-itself specifically in its relations to the in-itself, insofar as these are constitutive of its being? Are we not now able to find an answer to questions of this type: given that the in-itself is what it is, how and why is it the case that the for-itself has, in its being, to be knowledge of the in-itself? And what is knowledge in general? I.  KNOWLEDGE AS A TYPE OF RELATION BETWEEN THE FOR-ITSELF AND THE IN-ITSELF The only kind of knowledge is intuitive.  Deduction and discourse, which are incorrectly labeled as “knowledge,” are only instruments leading to intuition.  When we reach the intuition, the means that were used to reach it are set aside; in cases where we cannot reach it, reasoning and discourse are left in the position of signposts that point toward an intuition that is out of reach.  Finally, if an intuition has been reached but is not a present mode of my consciousness, the maxims that I employ persist, as the results of operations that I carried out earlier, like Descartes’s “memories of ideas.” 3 And if we ask what intuition is, Husserl will reply (in agreement with most philosophers) that it is the presence of the “thing” ( Sache ) in person to consciousness.  Knowledge, therefore, has the type of being that we described in the previous chapter under the heading of “presence to…” But we established that the in-itself cannot by itself ever be a presence .  In point of fact, being-present is an ecstatic mode of being of the for-itself.  We are obliged therefore to reverse the terms of our definition: intuition is the presence of consciousness to the thing.  What we need to come back to now, therefore, is the nature and the meaning of this for-itself’s presence to being.  In our Introduction—by making use of a non-elucidated concept of “consciousness”—we established the necessity for consciousness to be conscious of something.  In fact it is through whatever it is conscious of that consciousness can distinguish itself with its own eyes, and be a consciousness (of) self.  A consciousness that was not conscious of something would not be conscious (of) anything.  But now we have elucidated the ontological meaning of consciousness, or the for-itself.  We are able therefore to present the problem in more exact terms and to ask: What might this necessity—that consciousness should be-conscious of something—mean, if we consider it at the level of ontology, i.e., within the perspective of being-for-itself? We know that the for-itself is the foundation of its own nothingness in the form of the phantom dyad: reflection-reflecting.  The reflecting exists only in order to reflect the reflection, and the reflection is only a reflection insofar as it refers back to the reflecting.  In this way each of the two nascent terms of the dyad points toward the other, and the being of each one is engaged within the other’s being.  But if the reflecting is nothing but a reflecting of this reflection, and if the reflection can be characterized only by its “ being-in-order-to be reflected in this reflecting,” the two terms of the quasi-dyad, bracing their two nothingnesses against each other, are jointly annihilated.  The reflecting has to reflect something if the whole is not to collapse into nothingness.  But if, on the other hand, the reflection was something —independently of its being-in-order-to-be-reflected—we would have to qualify it not as a reflection but as in-itself.  That would introduce opacity within the “reflection-reflecting” system and, in particular, it would bring the nascent scissiparity to completion.  For, within the for-itself, the reflection is also the reflecting.  But once the reflection is qualified, it becomes separated from the reflecting and its appearance is separated from its reality; the cogito becomes impossible.  The reflection can only be “something to be reflected” and at the same time nothing if it becomes qualified by something other than itself or, alternatively, if it is reflected as a relation to an “outside” that it is not.  What defines the reflection for the reflecting is always that to which it is presence .  Even an instance of joy, apprehended at the unreflected level, is nothing but a “reflected” presence to a laughing and open world, full of happy perspectives.  But the preceding sentences allow us already to anticipate that not-being is an essential structure of presence.  Presence includes a radical negation, as presence to something that we are not.  What is present to me is not me.  We should note, moreover, that this “not-being” is implied a priori by any theory of knowledge.  It is impossible to construct the notion of an object if there is not, from the beginning, a negative relation by which the object is designated as that which is not consciousness.  The phrase “not-self,” which was fashionable at one time, conveyed this well—even though it was impossible to discern the slightest concern, in the people using it, to provide any foundation for this original “not” that characterized the external world.  4 In fact, neither the combination of representations, nor the necessity of certain subjective structures, nor the irreversibility of time, nor the recourse to the infinite can serve to constitute the object as such—i.e., to serve as a foundation for a further negation that delineates the not-self, and opposes it to the self as such—unless that negation, precisely, is given first and is the a priori foundation of all experience.  In advance of any comparison, or any construction, a thing has to be present to consciousness as not being consciousness.  The original relation of presence, as the foundation of knowledge, is negative.  But as it is through the for-itself that negation comes into the world, and as a thing is what it is in the absolute indifference of identity, what posits itself as not being the for-itself cannot be a thing.  The negation comes from the for-itself itself.  We should not conceive of this negation on the model of a judgment, bearing on the thing itself and denying, in relation to that thing, its identity with the for-itself: that type of negation could be conceived only if the for-itself were a ready-made substance and, even in that case, it could only emerge from a third person establishing, from outside, a negative relation between two beings.  Instead, it is the for-itself that constitutes itself, through original negation, as not being the thing.  So the definition of consciousness we gave a short time ago can be expressed, from the for-itself’s perspective, as follows: “The for-itself is a being for whom its being is in question in its being insofar as this being is essentially a specific way of not being a being that it posits at the same time as other than itself.” Knowledge appears therefore as a mode of being.  Knowing is neither a relation that is subsequently established between two beings, nor an activity of one of these two beings, nor is it a quality, a property or a virtue.  It is the for-itself’s very being insofar as it is presence to…, i.e., insofar as the for-itself has its being to be, in making itself not be a specific being to which it is present.  That implies that the for-itself can exist only in the mode of a reflection that gets reflected as not being a specific being.  The “something” that has to qualify what is reflected—in order to prevent the “reflection-reflecting” pair from collapsing into nothingness—is pure negation.  The reflected becomes qualified outside , alongside some specific being, as not being that being; that is precisely what “to be conscious of something” means.  But we should clarify what we mean by this original negation.  We need, in fact, to distinguish between two types of negation: external negation and internal negation.  The former appears as a purely external connection between two beings, established by a witness.  For example, when I say “The cup is not the inkwell,” it is quite clear that the foundation of this negation lies neither in the cup nor in the inkwell.  5 Each of these objects is what it is, and that’s all that is to be said.  The negation is like an ideal and categorical connection that I establish between them, without modifying them in any respect, without enriching or impoverishing them with the slightest quality; they are not in the least touched by this negative synthesis.  As it serves neither to enrich them nor to constitute them, it remains strictly external.  But if we consider sentences such as “I am not rich” or “I am not handsome” we will already be able to guess the meaning of the other type of negation.  Uttered with a certain melancholy, these phrases mean not only that I am withholding from myself some particular quality but that the refusal itself comes to influence, in its internal structure, the positive being to whom it has been refused.  When I say “I am not handsome,” I do not confine myself to denying that some particular property applies to me, taken as a concrete whole—such that this property passes into nothingness, leaving the positive totality of my being intact (as when I say “The vase is not white; it is gray,” “The inkwell is not on the table; it is on the mantelpiece”).  What I mean is that “not being beautiful” is a particular negative property of my being, which characterizes me from inside, and also that— qua negativity—“not being beautiful” is a real quality of myself, and this negative quality explains my melancholy, for example, just as effectively as my lack of worldly success.  By “internal negation” we mean a relation between two beings, where the one that we deny in relation to the other qualifies the other, at the heart of its essence, precisely by its absence.  In this case the negation becomes an essential connection of being, since at least one of the beings on which it bears is such that it indicates the other, and bears the other in its heart as an absence.  It is clear, however, that this type of negation cannot apply to being-in-itself.  It belongs by its nature to the for-itself.  Only the for-itself can be determined in its being by a being that it is not.  And if internal negation can appear within the world—as when we describe a pearl as a fake, or a fruit as unripe, or an egg as not being fresh, etc.—it is through the for-itself that it enters the world, like all negation in general.  If, therefore, knowing appertains only to the for-itself, it is because it is characteristic only of the for-itself to appear to itself as not being the thing that it knows.  And as appearance and being are just one and the same here—since the for-itself has the being of its appearance—we are obliged to conceive of the for-itself as including, within its being, the being of the object that it is not, insofar as it is in question in its being as not being that being.  We must dissociate ourselves at this point from an illusion that can be formulated in these terms: in order to constitute oneself as not being this or that being, we must first in some way or other have some knowledge of that being, because I am unable to judge how I differ from a being about which I know nothing.  Certainly, in our empirical existence we are unable to know how we differ from someone Japanese or English, from a worker or a sovereign, before we have any notion of these various beings.  But these empirical distinctions cannot provide our starting point here, because we are preparing to study an ontological relation that is required to make all our experience possible, and our aim is to establish how it is possible in general for an object to exist for consciousness.  It cannot be the case, therefore, that I have an experience of the object—as an object which is not me—before I constitute it as an object.  But, on the contrary, what makes all experience possible is the object’s a priori arising for the subject or—since the for-itself’s original fact is its arising—an original arising of the for-itself as presence to the object that it is not.  We need therefore to reverse the terms in our earlier formulation: the fundamental relation through which the for-itself has to be, as not being this particular being to which it is present, is the foundation of all knowledge of this being.  But if we want to make this initial relation comprehensible, we need a better description of it.  Part of the statement of the intellectualist illusion that we criticized in the last paragraph remains true: it is not possible for me to determine myself not to be some object that is from the outset cut off from any connection with me.  I am not able to deny that I am that being, at a distance from that being.  If I conceive of a being that is entirely closed in on itself, that being by itself will quite simply be what it is and, in consequence, there will be no space in it either for a negation, or for knowledge.  In fact, it is on the basis of the being that it is not that any being is able to become acquainted with what it is not.  In other words, the for-itself, in the case of internal negation, appears to itself as not being what it is not over there, in and on the being that it is not.  In this sense, internal negation is a concrete ontological connection.  What we have here is not an instance of empirical negation, in which the qualities that are negated are distinguished primarily by their absence, or even their non-being.  In internal negation, the for-itself is crushed against what it negates.  The negated qualities are precisely what is most present to the for-itself; it is from them that the for-itself draws its negative power, and constantly renews it.  In this sense, we must regard them as a constitutive factor of the for-itself’s being, because it is obliged to be over there, outside itself, against them: it has to be them , in order to negate its being them.  In short, the origin-term 6 of internal negation is the in-itself, the thing that is there ; and outside it there is nothing, apart from an emptiness, a nothingness that is only distinguished from the thing by a pure negation, whose content is provided precisely by this thing.  The difficulty encountered by materialism in deriving our knowledge of an object stems from the fact that it tries to produce one substance on the basis of another substance.  But this difficulty will not stand in our way, because we are claiming that, outside the in-itself, there is nothing —other than a reflection of that nothing which is itself polarized and defined by the in-itself insofar as it is precisely the nothingness of this in-itself, the individualized nothing which is nothing because it is not the in-itself.  Thus, within this ecstatic relation, through which internal negation and knowledge are constituted, the concrete pole in its plenitude is the in-itself in person, and the for-itself is nothing apart from the void within which the in-itself stands out.  The for-itself is outside itself in the in-itself, since it comes to be defined by what it is not: the primary connection of the in-itself to the for-itself is therefore a connection of being.  But this connection is neither a lack nor an absence .  In fact, in the case of absence I am effectively determined by a being that I am not and which does not exist, or does not exist there, which means I am determined by something like a cavity, in the midst of what we may call my empirical plenitude.  In knowledge, on the contrary, construed as an ontological connection of being, the being that I am not represents the in-itself’s absolute plenitude.  And, in contrast, I am the nothingness, the absence that determines itself to exist on the basis of that plenum.  So, in this type of being that we call “knowing,” the only being that we can encounter and which is constantly there is the known .  The knowing is not; we cannot get hold of it.  It is nothing but that which makes it the case that the known involves a being-there , a presence—because, by itself, the known is neither present nor absent; it simply is.  But this presence of the known is a presence to nothing , because the knowing is purely a reflection of a non-being; it appears therefore, through the total translucency of the knowing, as an absolute presence.  Cases of fascination can furnish examples—psychological and empirical—of this original relation.  Indeed, in such cases, where the immediate fact of knowledge is represented, the knowing is absolutely nothing but a pure negation: in no place can it be found, or retrieved; it is not ; the only property it is able to support is, precisely, that of not being this fascinating object.  In the state of fascination, nothing continues to exist apart from a giant object, in a deserted world.  And yet the fascinated intuition is not in any way a fusion with the object.  This is because it is a condition of fascination that the object should detach itself in absolute relief against an empty ground, i.e., that I should be, precisely, the immediate negation of the object, and nothing but that.  We meet this pure negation again in the pantheistic intuitions that Rousseau occasionally describes as concrete psychological events in his history.  At these points he declares that he “melted into” the universe, that suddenly the only thing found to be present was the world, as an absolute presence and unconditioned totality.  And of course we can understand this total and deserted presence of the world, its pure “being-there”; we can readily acknowledge that in this exceptional moment there was nothing other than the world.  But that does not mean we should concede, as Rousseau would have it, that consciousness has become fused with the world.  Such a fusion would imply that the for-itself had solidified into the in-itself and, thereby, the disappearance of the world and the in-itself as presence.  It is true that, in a pantheistic intuition, there is nothing more than the world—apart from whatever makes it the case that the in-itself is present as the world (i.e., a pure negation that is non-thetically conscious (of) itself as negation).  And, precisely because knowledge is not absence but presence , there is nothing separating the knowing from the known.  Intuition is often defined as the immediate presence of the known to the knowing, but only rarely has anyone reflected on the requirements of the notion of the immediate .  The immediate is the absence of anything which mediates, which goes without saying—otherwise what is known would be the mediator, and not the mediated.  But if we are unable to posit any intermediary, we are obliged at the same time to reject both continuity and discontinuity as the type of presence of the knowing to the known.  Indeed, we cannot allow any continuity between the knowing and the known, because that would require some intermediate term that is at the same time knowing and known, which would destroy the autonomy of the knowing in relation to the known, by committing the being of the knowing within the being of the known.  In that case the structure of the object disappears, since the object requires to be absolutely negated, qua the for-itself’s being, by the for-itself.  But neither can we regard the for-itself’s original relation to the in-itself as a relation of discontinuity .  Of course, the separation between two discontinuous elements is a void, i.e., a nothing , but it is a nothing that has been actualized or realized , and therefore in-itself .  As such, this substantialized nothing is a non-conductive density; it destroys the immediacy of presence, because it has become something , insofar as it is nothing.  The for-itself’s presence to the in-itself, which we cannot describe either in terms of continuity or in terms of discontinuity, is purely a negated identity .  To get a better grasp of this, we can use a comparison: when two curves are at a tangent to each other, they display a type of presence without any intermediary.  But it is also the case that, for the entire length of their tangent, the eye apprehends only one single line .  Even if we were to cover up the two curves—so that all we could see was the AB length at which they are co-tangent—it would be impossible to distinguish them.  This is because what separates them is in fact nothing : there is neither continuity nor discontinuity but pure identity.  And should we suddenly uncover the two figures, we will once again apprehend them, throughout their length, as being two—not because of a sudden de facto separation that has suddenly been actualized between them, but because each of the two movements through which we draw the two curves, in order to perceive them, includes a negation as its constituting act.  Thus, what separates the two curves even where they are tangent is nothing , not even a distance: it is a pure negativity, as the counterpart to a constituting synthesis.  This image will allow us to grasp more clearly the relation of immediacy that, from the outset, joins the knowing to the known.  In the ordinary case, in fact, a negation bears on a “something” that preexists the negation and constitutes its matter: if, for example, I say that the inkwell is not the table, the table and the inkwell are objects that are already constituted, whose being in itself will be what supports the negative judgment.  But in the case of the “knowing-known” relation, there is nothing, on the side of the knowing, that could support the negation: “there is not” any difference, or any distinguishing principle, to separate in-itself the knowing from the known.  Rather, within the complete lack of distinction in being, there is nothing but a negation—which does not even exist—a negation that has to be , and does not even posit itself as a negation.  So, in the end, the knowledge and the knowing itself are nothing, other than the fact that “there is” being, that being in itself is given and stands out in relief against the ground of this nothing.  In this sense, we can call knowledge the “pure solitude of the known.” This suffices to show that the basic phenomenon of knowledge adds nothing to being, and creates nothing.  Being is not enriched through it, because knowledge is pure negativity.  It only makes it the case that there is being.  But this fact “that there is” being is not an internal determination of being—which is what it is—but of negativity.  In this sense, every disclosure of a positive characteristic of being is the counterpart of an ontological determination of the for-itself in its being as pure negativity.  For example, as we will see later on, the disclosure of being’s spatiality is just one and the same thing as the for-itself’s non-positional apprehension of itself as non-extended .  And the for-itself’s non-extended character is not some mysterious positive property of mentality, concealed beneath a negative description: it is by nature an ecstatic relation, because it is through and within the extension of the transcendent in-itself that the for-itself becomes acquainted with and realizes or actualizes its own non-extension.  The for-itself cannot in the first place be non-extended, in order subsequently to enter into relation with some extended being because, no matter how we think about it, the concept of non-extension cannot by itself have any meaning: it is nothing but the negation of extension.  If by some miracle it were possible to eliminate extension from the disclosed determinations of the in-itself, the for-itself would not remain a-spatial ; it would be neither extended nor non-extended, and it would become impossible to characterize it in relation to extension in any way.  Extension, in this case, is a transcendent determination that the for-itself has to apprehend to the exact degree to which it negates itself as extended.  That is why the best term to use, to signify this internal relation of knowing and being, is the verb we were using just now: “ to realize ,” with its double meaning, ontological and gnostic.  7 I realize a project insofar as I give it being, but I also realize my situation, insofar as I live it, insofar as I make it be with my being, and I “realize” the enormity of a catastrophe, the difficulty of an enterprise.  To know is to realize in the two senses of this verb.  It is to make it the case that there is being, by having the reflected negation of this being to be: the real is a realization .  We can give the name “transcendence” to this internal and realizing negation which discloses the in-itself by determining the for-itself in its being.  II.  ON DETERMINATION AS NEGATION To which being is the for-itself present? Let us note straightaway that the question is badly put: being is what it is, and it cannot bear by itself the determination “this one,” in answer to the question “which one?” In short, a question can have meaning only if it is raised within a world.  In consequence, the for-itself cannot be present to this one rather than that one , since its presence is what makes it the case that there is  il y a  a “this one” rather than a “that one.” Yet our examples have shown us a for-itself concretely negating its being that particular being.  But that is because, in describing the relationship of knowledge, we were concerned first and foremost to bring its structure of negativity to light.  So, by virtue of its being disclosed by means of examples, this negativity was already secondary.  The negativity of original transcendence is not determined on the basis of a this ; rather, it makes it the case that a this exists.  The for-itself’s original presence is presence to being.  Should we say, then, that it is presence to all of being? But then we would fall back into our previous error, because totality can come to being only through the for-itself.  Indeed, any totality presupposes an internal relation of being between the terms of a quasi-multiplicity, in the same way as a multiplicity presupposes, in order to be that multiplicity, a totalizing internal relation between its elements; in this sense, addition itself is a synthetic act.  Totality can come to beings only through a being that has its own totality to be in their presence.  This is precisely the case for the for-itself, a detotalized totality that temporalizes itself within a constant incompleteness.  It is the for-itself in its presence to being that makes it the case that all being exists.  Indeed, we should be quite clear that we can only refer to this being right here as “ this ” against the ground of the presence of all being.  It does not follow that, in order to exist, one being needs all of being, but rather that the for-itself actualizes itself as an actualizing presence to this being against the original ground of an actualizing presence to everything .  But, conversely, as the totality is an internal ontological relation of the “ thises ,” it can be disclosed only in and through the particular “ thises .” So the for-itself actualizes itself as an actualizing presence to all of being, insofar as it is an actualizing presence to the “ thises ”—and to the particular “ thises ,” insofar as it is an actualizing presence to all of being.  In other words, the for-itself’s presence to the world can be actualized only through its presence to one or to several particular things; and, conversely, its presence to a particular thing can be actualized only against the ground of a presence to the world.  Perception can be articulated only against the ontological ground of a presence to the world, and the world is concretely disclosed as the ground of each particular perception.  It remains for us to explain how, in arising to being, the for-itself can make it the case that there is an all , and that there are “ thises .” The for-itself’s presence to being as a totality stems from the fact that the for-itself has to be—in the mode of being what it is not and not being what it is—its own totality as a detotalized totality.  Indeed, insofar as the for-itself makes itself be, in the unity of a single movement of arising, as everything that is not being, being stands before it as everything that it is not.  The original negation is, in effect, a radical negation.  The for-itself placed before being as its own totality, in being itself the whole of negation, is the negation of the whole.  In this way, the completed totality—or the world—is disclosed as constitutive of the being of the incomplete totality through which the being of the totality arises in being.  It is through the world that the for-itself becomes acquainted with itself as a detotalized totality; in other words, through its very arising, the for-itself is the disclosure of being as a totality, insofar as the for-itself has, in detotalized mode, its own totality to be.  Thus the for-itself’s very meaning is outside, within being, but it is through the for-itself that the meaning of being appears.  This totalization of being adds nothing to being: it is nothing but the way that being is disclosed as not being the for-itself, the way in which there is being; it appears outside the for-itself , escaping any attempt to reach it, as that which determines the for-itself in its being.  But the act of disclosing being as a totality does not impinge on being, any more than my act of counting two cups on the table impinges on either cup in its existence or in its nature.  But nor is it purely a subjective modification of the for-itself, since, on the contrary, it is through the for-itself that any subjectivity is possible.  But if the for-itself is obliged to be the nothingness through which “there is” being, there can only be being, originally, as a totality.  In this way, therefore, knowledge is the world; to use Heidegger’s language, it is the world and, outside that, nothing .  8 However, it is not originally within this “nothing” that human-reality emerges.  This nothing is human-reality itself, as the radical negation through which the world is disclosed.  And certainly, the mere apprehension of the world as a totality makes a nothingness appear on the world’s side , maintaining this totality and surrounding it.  It is even this nothingness—as the absolute nothing that is left outside the totality—that determines the totality as such: it is for just this reason that the totalization adds nothing to being, since it is merely the result of nothingness appearing as the limit of being.  But this nothingness is not anything, other than human-reality grasping itself as excluded from being and as constantly beyond being, in commerce with nothing.  To say that human-reality is that through which being is disclosed as a totality, or that human-reality is what makes it the case that “there is” nothing outside being, amounts to the same thing.  This nothing, as the possibility of there being a “beyond” to the world, insofar as (1) this possibility discloses being as the world, and (2) human-reality has this possibility to be, constitutes, with our original presence to being, the circuit of ipseity.  But human-reality only makes itself the incomplete totality of negations to the extent that it overflows some particular negation—a negation that it has to be as its current presence to being.  Indeed, if human-reality was purely conscious (of) being one syncretic, undifferentiated negation, it would not be able to determine itself and could not therefore be the concrete totality—albeit detotalized—of its determinations.  It is a totality only insofar as it escapes, through all its other negations, the concrete negation that it presently is: its being can only be its own totality to the extent that it is a surpassing of the partial structure that it is toward the whole that it has to be.  Otherwise it would simply be what it is, and could not in any way be considered either as a totality or as a non-totality.  Therefore, just as any partial negative structure has to appear against the ground of the undifferentiated negations that I am—and of which it forms part—being-in-itself acquaints me with a specific concrete reality that I have not to be.  The being that I presently am not , insofar as it appears against the ground of the totality of being, is the this .  This—i.e., what I presently am not, insofar as I have nothing in being to be—is what is disclosed against the undifferentiated ground of being, in order to acquaint me with the concrete negation that I have to be, against the totalizing ground of my negations.  This original relation between the whole and the this is at the source of the relation, illuminated by Gestalttheorie , between the ground and the figure.  The this always appears against a ground—i.e., against the undifferentiated totality of being—insofar as the for-itself is its radical and syncretic negation.  But it may always become diluted within this undifferentiated totality when another this arises.  But the appearance of the this , or the figure against the ground, as the correlative of the appearance of my own concrete negation against the syncretic ground of a radical negation, implies that I am, and at the same time that I am not, this totalizing negation—or, alternatively, that I am it, in the mode of “not being,” and that I am not it, in the mode of being it.  Indeed, it is only thus that the present negation can appear against the ground of the radical negation that it is.  Otherwise, it would be entirely cut off from it—or else it would become merged into it.  The appearance of the this against the whole is correlative to a specific way that the for-itself has of being the negation of itself.  There is a this because I am not yet my future negations, and I am no longer my past negations.  The disclosure of the this presupposes that “the emphasis is placed” on some specific negation, with the others receding into the syncretic disappearance of the ground, which is to say that the for-itself can exist only as a negation that is constituted on the withdrawal of radical negativity in its totality.  The for-itself is not the world, spatiality, permanence, matter—in brief, the in-itself in general—but its way of not-being-these is to have not to be this table, this glass, this bedroom, against the total ground of negativity.  Therefore the this presupposes a negation of negation—but a negation that has the radical negation it is negating to be, and does not cease to be attached to it by an ontological thread but remains ready to merge into it through the arising of another this .  In this sense, the this is disclosed as a this by the “withdrawal into the ground of the world” of all the other thises ; its determination—which is at the origin of all determinations—is a negation.  We should be clear that this negation—seen from the side of the this —is wholly ideal.  It adds nothing to being, and subtracts nothing from it.  The being that is regarded as this is what it is, and does not stop being it; it does not become.  As such, it cannot be outside itself within the whole, as a structure of the whole, and neither can it be outside itself within the whole, in order to negate, in relation to itself, its identity with the whole.  Negation can arrive at the this only through a being that has to be presence to the whole of being and, at the same time, to the this —i.e., an ecstatic being.  And as it leaves the this intact as a being-in-itself, as it does not perform any real synthesis of all the thises as a totality, the constitutive negation of the this is a negation whose type is external ; the relation of the this to the whole is a relation of externality.  Thus we see determination appearing as an external negation that is correlative to the internal, radical, and ecstatic negation that I am.  This explains the ambiguous character of the world, which is disclosed at the same time as a synthetic totality and as a purely additive collection of all the thises .  Indeed, to the extent that the world is a totality disclosed as what the for-itself has radically to be its own nothingness against, the world presents itself as an undifferentiated syncretism.  But insofar as this radical nihilation is always beyond some concrete and present nihilation, the world appears to be always on the point of opening up like a box, in order to allow one or several thises to appear that already were , within the ground’s lack of differentiation, what they are now, as a differentiated figure.  In this way, if we move progressively closer to a landscape that was introduced to us as various large masses, we will see objects appear that are given as having already been there, as elements within a discontinuous collection of thises ; and in this way, in the experiments of Gestalttheorie , the continuous ground, once it is apprehended as a figure, bursts into a multiplicity of discontinuous elements.  Thus the world, as the correlative of a detotalized totality, appears as an evanescent totality, in the sense that it is never a real synthesis but rather an ideal limitation—by means of nothing—of a collection of thises .  In this way the continuous , as a formal quality of the ground, allows the discontinuous to appear as a type of external relation between the this and the totality.  This constant evanescence of the totality into a collection, and of the continuous into the discontinuous, is precisely what we refer to as “space.” Indeed, space cannot be a being .  It is a moving relation between beings that have no relation.  It is the total independence of the in-itselfs, insofar as that is disclosed to a being who is present to “all” of the in-itself as the independence of each of them in relation to the others ; it is the unique way in which beings are able to be revealed, to the being through whom relations arrive in the world, as having no relation: i.e., as pure externality.  And as this externality cannot belong to any of the thises under consideration and as, moreover, insofar as it is a purely local negativity it is destructive of itself, it is unable either to be by itself or to “be been.” The spatializing being is the for-itself, insofar as it is co-present to the whole and to the this ; space is not the world but the instability of the world that we grasp as a totality, insofar as it can always break up into an external multiplicity.  Space is neither the ground nor the figure but the ground’s ideality insofar as it can always break up into figures; it is neither the continuous nor the discontinuous but the constant passage from the continuous to the discontinuous.  The existence of space proves that the for-itself, in making it the case that there is being, adds nothing to being; it is the ideality of synthesis.  In this sense, to the extent that it derives its origin from the world, space is the totality—but at the same time it is nothing , insofar as it results in the proliferation of the thises .  Space does not allow itself to be grasped in a concrete intuition, because it is not; rather, it is continuously spatialized.  Space depends on temporality and appears within temporality, insofar as it can enter the world only through a being whose mode of being is temporalization, because it is the way in which that being ecstatically loses itself in order to actualize being.  The spatial property of the this is not synthetically added to the this but is only its “ place ,” i.e., its external relation with the ground, insofar as this relation may collapse into a multiplicity of external relations with other thises , when the ground itself breaks up into a multiplicity of figures.  In this sense it is pointless to conceive of space as a form imposed by the a priori structure of our sensibility on phenomena: space cannot be a form because it is nothing ; on the contrary, it marks the fact that nothing, apart from negation (and even here as a type of external relation that leaves what it joins intact), can arrive in the in-itself through the for-itself.  As for the for-itself, if it is not space, that is precisely because it apprehends itself as not being being-in-itself, insofar as the in-itself is disclosed to it in the mode of externality known to us as “extension.” It is precisely insofar as the for-itself negates externality in relation to itself—by grasping itself as ecstatic—that it spatializes space.  This is because the for-itself’s relation to the in-itself is not juxtaposition, or indifferent externality: its relation to the in-itself, as the foundation of all relations, is internal negation, and it is through the for-itself, on the contrary, that being-in-itself comes into its relation of indifferent externality with other beings existing within a world.  When indifferent externality is hypostasized into a substance that exists in and through itself—which can happen only at a lower stage of knowledge—it becomes the object of a particular branch of study, called “geometry,” and becomes a mere specification of the abstract theory of multiplicities.  What remains to be determined is the type of being possessed by external negation, insofar as it enters the world through the for-itself.  We know that external negation does not belong to the this : this newspaper does not deny, in relation to itself, that it is the table against which it stands out; otherwise it would be ecstatically outside itself, in the table it negates, and its relation to the table would be an internal negation; the newspaper would thereby cease to be in-itself, and would become for-itself.  The determinative relation of the this cannot therefore belong either to the this or to the that : it surrounds them without touching them, without conferring on them the slightest new character; it leaves them as what they are.  In this sense, we are obliged to modify Spinoza’s famous formulation, described by Hegel as infinite in its riches—“ Omnis determinatio est negatio ” 9 —and to assert instead that any negation that does not belong to the being who has its own determinations to be is an ideal negation.  Moreover, it is inconceivable that it could be otherwise.  Even if, in the style of a critical-empiricist psychologism, we were to regard things as purely subjective contents, it would be impossible to conceive how the subject could actualize any internal synthetic negations between these contents without being them , within a radical ecstatic immanence that would remove all hope of any passage to objectivity.  A fortiori , we are unable to imagine the for-itself operating any synthetic and deforming negations between transcendent items that it is not.  In this sense, the external negation constitutive of the this cannot appear as an objective feature of the thing, if what we mean by “objective” is something that belongs by its nature to the in-itself or something that, in some way or other, really constitutes the object as it is.  But this should not lead us to conclude that external negation has a subjective existence, as a pure mode of the for-itself’s being.  The for-itself’s type of existence is pure internal negation; the existence within it of any external negation would nullify its very existence.  In consequence, external negation cannot be a way of arranging and classifying phenomena insofar as they are only subjective phantasms, and nor can it “subjectivize” being, insofar as the disclosure of being is constitutive of the for-itself.  Its very externality requires it, therefore, to remain “in the air,” as external to the for-itself as it is to the in-itself.  But, on the other hand, precisely because this negation is external, it cannot exist through itself; it rejects all supports, and is “ unselbstständig ” by nature—and yet it is unable to form a relation to any substance.  It is a nothing .  Evidently, it is because the inkwell is not the table—and nor is it the pipe or the glass, etc.—that we are able to grasp it as the inkwell.  And yet, if I say “the inkwell is not the table,” what I think is nothing .  Thus, any determination is a nothing , which belongs as an internal structure neither to the thing nor to consciousness, but whose being is to-be-cited by the for-itself through a system of internal negations within which the in-itself is disclosed in its indifference to everything that it is not.  Insofar as the for-itself is acquainted through the in-itself with what it is not, in the mode of internal negation, the in-itself’s indifference—as an indifference that the for-itself has not to be—is revealed within the world as determination.  III.  QUALITY AND QUANTITY, POTENTIALITY AND EQUIPMENTALITY Quality is nothing other than the being of the this, when we consider it outside any external relation to the world or to other thises .  All too often, it has been conceived of as a purely subjective determination, so that its quality-being becomes confused with the subjectivity of the psyche.  Then the problem appears primarily to be that of explaining the constitution of an object-pole, conceived of as the transcendent unity of qualities.  We have shown that this problem is insoluble.  A quality cannot be objectified if it is subjective.  Even if we suppose ourselves to have projected the unity of an object-pole beyond its qualities, each quality will be directly given, at most, as the subjective effect of the action of things upon us.  But the lemon’s yellow is not a subjective mode of apprehension of the lemon: it is the lemon.  And nor is it true that the object-X appears as the empty form that holds the disparate qualities together.  In fact, the lemon extends throughout its qualities, and each one of these qualities extends throughout each of the others.  It is the lemon’s acidity that is yellow, and the lemon’s yellowness that is acidic; we eat the color of a cake, and the taste of that cake is the instrument that discloses its form and its color to what we may call our “alimentary intuition.” Conversely, if I plunge my finger into a jar of jam, the jam’s sticky coldness is a revelation of its sweet taste to my fingers.  The fluidity, the warmth, the bluish color, the undulating mobility of the water of a swimming pool are given all at once, each through the others; this complete interpenetration is what we mean by “this.” The experiments of the painters—Cézanne’s in particular—provide an excellent illustration: it is not true, as Husserl thinks, that some synthetic necessity unconditionally joins something’s color to its form.  Instead, the form is color and light; if the painter varies any one of these factors, the others will also vary, not because they are bound by some law or other but because they are fundamentally just one and the same being.  In this sense, each quality of being is all of being: it is the presence of its absolute contingency, the irreducibility of its indifference; the apprehension of a quality adds nothing to being, other than the fact that there is being like this .  In this sense, a quality is not an external aspect of being, because being, lacking any “inside,” cannot have any “outside.” Only, in order for there to be any quality, it is necessary that there is being for a nothingness that, by its nature, is not being.  However, being is not quality in itself —although it is nothing more or less than it.  Rather, any quality is being in its entirety , disclosing itself within the limits of the “there is.” It is not being’s outside but the whole of being, insofar as there can be no being for being, but only for something that makes itself not be that being.  The for-itself’s relation to quality is an ontological relation.  The intuition of a quality is not a passive contemplation of something given, and the mind is not an in-itself that, in the course of such contemplation, remains what it is—i.e., remains in the mode of indifference in relation to the contemplated this .  But, through the quality, the for-itself becomes acquainted with what it is not.  To perceive the red as the color of this notebook is to reflect oneself as the internal negation of this quality.  In other words, the apprehension of the quality is not, as Husserl would have it, a “fulfillment” ( Erfüllung ) but the informing of a void as the determinate void of this quality.  In this sense, quality is a presence that is constantly out of reach.  Descriptions of knowledge have all too often been given in terms of food.  There is still too much pre-logical thinking in epistemological philosophy and we have not yet rid ourselves of that primitive illusion (of which we must, later, give an account) according to which to know something is to eat it, i.e., to ingest the known object, to be filled by it ( Erfüllung ) and to digest it (“assimilation”).  10 We can give a better account of the original phenomenon of perception by emphasizing the fact that quality stands in relation to us in a relation of absolute proximity—it “ is there ,” it haunts us—without either giving or withholding itself, but we must add that this proximity implies a distance.  Quality is immediately out of our reach and, by definition, it points us out to ourselves as a void.  Its contemplation can only increase our thirst for being, just as the sight of the foods that were out of his reach increased Tantalus’s hunger.  A quality is an indication of what we are not, and of the mode of being that is withheld from us.  To perceive whiteness is to be conscious of the impossibility, as a matter of principle, of the for-itself’s existing as a color—i.e., of its being what it is.  In the same vein, it is not only that we cannot distinguish being from its qualities but also that any apprehension of a quality is the apprehension of a this ; no matter what it is, the quality is disclosed to us as a being.  The scent that I suddenly inhale, with my eyes closed, even before I have related it to an aromatic object, is already a scent-being and not a subjective impression; the morning light that strikes my eyes, through my closed eyelids, is already a light-being.  One only needs to reflect that quality is , for this to appear obvious.  As a being that is what it is, a quality can certainly appear to a subjectivity, but it cannot insert itself within the fabric of that subjectivity—which is what it is not, and is not what it is.  To say that any quality is a quality-being is in no way to endow it with some mysterious support, analogous to a substance; it is simply to point out that its mode of being is radically different from the “for-itself” mode of being.  We are wholly unable, indeed, to apprehend the being of whiteness, or of acidity, as ecstatic.  If, now, we ask how it is possible for a this to possess “some” qualities, our reply will be that in fact the this is liberated as a totality against the ground of the world, and it is given as an undifferentiated unity.  It is the for-itself that is able to negate itself from various points of view as it confronts the this , and to disclose quality as a new this , against the ground of the thing.  To each negating act through which the for-itself’s freedom spontaneously constitutes its being, there corresponds a complete disclosure of being “through a profile.” This profile is nothing but a relation of the thing to the for-itself, actualized by the for-itself itself.  It is the absolute determination of negativity: because it is not enough for the for-itself, through a primordial negation, not to be being, nor for it not to be this being; for its determination as a nothingness of being to be complete, it is also necessary that the for-itself should actualize itself as a specific, irreplaceable way of not being this being; and this absolute determination, which determines the quality as a profile of the this , belongs to the for-itself’s freedom; it is not ; it exists as something “to be.” Anyone can see this for himself, by considering how the disclosure of one quality of a thing always appears as a gratuitous fact apprehended through a freedom; I cannot make it the case that this peel is not green, but it is I who make it the case that I grasp it as a green-that-is-coarse, or as a coarseness-that-is-green.  Only here the figure-ground relation is quite different from the relation of the this to the world.  This is because the figure, rather than appearing against an undifferentiated ground, is entirely penetrated by the ground; the figure retains the ground within itself as its own undifferentiated density.  If I apprehend the peel as green, its “luminosity-coarseness” will be disclosed as that green’s undifferentiated internal ground and plenitude of being.  No abstraction is involved here—in the sense in which abstraction separates out what is joined—because the being still appears in its entirety in its profile.  But the being’s actualization is a condition of abstraction, because to abstract is not to apprehend some quality “in the air” but a this-quality, in which the lack of differentiation within its internal ground approaches an absolute equilibrium.  The abstract “green” does not lose its density of being—otherwise it would no longer be anything more than a subjective mode of the for-itself—but the luminosity, the shape, the coarseness, etc., that are given through it merge into the nihilating equilibrium of a pure and simple massivity .  Nonetheless, abstraction is a phenomenon of presence to being, since an abstract being retains its transcendence.  But it can be actualized only as a presence to being beyond being: it is a surpassing.  This presence of being can be actualized only at the level of possibility, and insofar as the for-itself has its own possibilities to be.  An abstraction is disclosed as the meaning that a quality has to be, in its capacity as co-present to the presence of a for-itself still to come.  In this way the abstract “green” is the forth-coming-meaning of the concrete this , insofar as it is revealed to me through its green-luminous-coarse profile.  It is this profile’s own possibility, insofar as that is revealed through the possibilities that I am, i.e., insofar as it is been .  But this directs us toward equipmentality and worldly temporality, to which we will return.  For now, it will suffice to say that the abstract haunts the concrete like a possibility frozen into the in-itself that the concrete has to be.  No matter what our perception is, as an original contact with being, the abstract is always there but it is to come ; and it is in the future, and with the future, that I grasp it.  11 It is the correlative of my present and concrete negation’s own possibility, as the possibility of being nothing more than this negation.  The abstract is the meaning of the this , insofar as it reveals itself to the future through my possibility of freezing the negation that I have to be into the in-itself.  Should someone remind us here of the classical aporias of abstraction, we will reply that these aporias arise from the assumption that the constitution of the this and the act of abstraction are distinct.  It is clear that, if the this does not bring its own abstract features with it, it will not be possible subsequently to derive them from it.  Rather, the abstraction operates in the very constitution of the this as a this , as the disclosure of the profile to my future.  The for-itself is not “an abstractor” because it is able to effect some psychological operation of abstraction but because it arises, as presence to being, with a future, i.e., as what is beyond being.  In-itself, being is neither concrete nor abstract, neither present nor future: it is what it is.  However, abstraction does not enrich being; it only reveals a nothingness of being beyond being.  But we challenge anyone to formulate the classical objections to abstraction without implicitly deriving them from a way of considering a being as a this .  The original relation between the thises cannot be interaction, or causality, or even that they arise against the same ground of the world.  Indeed, if we assume that the for-itself is present to a this , the other thises will exist “in the world” at the same time, but they will be undifferentiated: they constitute the ground against which the envisaged this will stand out in relief.  In order for a relation of any kind to be established between a this and another this , it is necessary for the second this to be disclosed, by arising from the ground of the world on the occasion of some explicit negation that the for-itself has to be.  But, at the same time, each this needs to stand at a distance from the other one, as not being the other one, through a negation whose type is purely external.  Thus the relation of this one to that one is an external negation.  That one appears as not being this one .  And this external negation is disclosed to the for-itself as something transcendent; it is outside, and it is in-itself .  How should this be understood? The appearance of this-one-that-one can in the first place come about only as a totality.  The first relation here is the unity of a totality that can be disintegrated; the for-itself determines itself en bloc not to be “this-one-that-one” against the ground of the world.  12 The “this-one-that-one” is my bedroom in its entirety, insofar as I am present to it.  This concrete negation does not disappear when the concrete whole disintegrates into this one and that one.  On the contrary, it is the very condition of its disintegration.  But against this ground of presence, and through this ground of presence, being allows its indifferent externality to appear: it is disclosed to me insofar as the negation that I am is a unity-multiplicity, instead of an undifferentiated totality.  My negative arising to being is fragmented into independent negations, whose only connection is that of being negations that I have to be—which means they derive their internal unity from me, and not from being.  I am present to this table, and to these chairs, and as such I synthetically constitute myself as a polyvalent negation, but, insofar as it is a negation of being, this purely internal negation is permeated by zones of nothingness: it nihilates itself as a negation; it is a detotalized negation.  The indifference of being appears through these grooves of nothingness that I have to be as my own nothingness of negation.  But I am to actualize this indifference, through this nothingness of negation that I have to be, not insofar as I am originally present to this but insofar as I am also present to that .  It is in and through my presence to the table that I actualize the indifference of the chair—the chair that I will also presently have not to be—as an absence of any launchpad, a pause in my momentum toward not-being, a break in the circuit.  That one appears beside this one, within a totalizing disclosure, as something that I am unable to make use of in determining myself not to be this one .  The cleavage, therefore, comes from being, but there is a cleavage and separation only through the for-itself’s presence to all being.  The negation of the unity of negations—insofar as it discloses being’s indifference, and grasps the indifference of this one through that one , and of that one through this one —discloses the original relation between the thises as an external negation.  A this one is not that one.  This external negation within the unity of a totality that can disintegrate is expressed by the word “and.” “This one is not that one” can be rewritten as “this one and that one.” External negation has the twofold character of being-in-itself and of being purely ideal.  It is in-itself by dint of not belonging in any way to the for-itself; it is even through the absolute internality of its own negation (since in aesthetic intuition I apprehend an imaginary object) that the for-itself uncovers being’s indifference as externality.  This is not a negation, moreover, that being has to be: it does not belong to any of the envisaged thises ; it straightforwardly is ; it is what it is.  But at the same time it is not in any way a feature of the this ; it is not one of its qualities.  It is even completely independent of the thises , precisely because it belongs neither to one nor to the other.  For being’s indifference is nothing : we cannot think it, or even perceive it.  It signifies quite simply that the annihilation or variations in that one cannot engage the thises in any way; in this sense, it is only an in-itself nothingness separating the thises , and this nothingness is the only way in which consciousness can actualize the cohesion of identity that is characteristic of being.  This ideal and in-itself nothingness is quantity .  In effect, quantity is pure externality: it does not depend at all on the terms that are added together; it only asserts their independence.  To count is to make an ideal discrimination, within a totality that can disintegrate and is already given.  The number that we obtain through the addition does not belong to any of the counted thises , nor to the disintegrable totality, insofar as that is disclosed as a totality.  It is not by virtue of apprehending them from the outset as a “group in conversation” that I may count these three men talking in front of me, and the fact of counting them as three leaves the concrete unity of their group perfectly intact.  Being “a group of three” is not a concrete property of the group.  But neither is it a property of its members.  We cannot say of any one of them that he is three, or even that he is the third , because the quality of being third is only a reflection of the freedom of the for-itself doing the counting; any one of them might be third, and none of them is.  The relation of quantity is therefore a relation that is in-itself, but purely negative: a relation of externality.  And it is precisely because it belongs neither to things nor to totalities that it becomes isolated, and stands out against the surface of the world like a reflection of nothingness on being.  As a pure relation of externality between the thises , it is itself external to the thises and, in conclusion, external to itself.  It is being’s elusive indifference—only able to appear if there is being and which, although it belongs to being, can only come to being from a for-itself, insofar as this indifference can be disclosed only through an infinite externalization of an external relation that must be external to being, and to itself.  In this way, space and quantity are only one and the same type of negation.  Solely by virtue of the disclosure of the this and the that as having no relation to me—I who am my own relation—space and quantity enter into the world, because both of these are relations between things that have no relation (or, equivalently, a nothingness of relation that is grasped as a relation by the being that is its own relation).  Through this fact itself, we can see that what we, along with Husserl, refer to as “ categories ” (unity-multiplicity; relation of the whole to the part; more and less; around; beside; following; first, second, etc.; one, two, three, etc.; inside and outside, etc.) are only ideal mixtures of things, in which they are left entirely intact, without being enriched or impoverished even by an iota , and they only point out the infinite diversity of ways in which the for-itself’s freedom can actualize the indifference of being.  13 We have discussed the problem of the for-itself’s original relation to being as if the for-itself were a simple instantaneous consciousness, as might be revealed to the Cartesian cogito .  In fact, we have already encountered the for-itself’s escaping from itself, insofar as that is a necessary condition of the appearance of any thises and abstractions.  But the for-itself’s ecstatic character was still only implicit.  If we have had to proceed like this for the clarity of our exposition, we ought not to conclude from it that being is disclosed to a being that is in the first place a presence, in order to constitute itself subsequently as a future.  Rather, being-in-itself is disclosed to a being that arises as forth-coming in relation to itself.  Therefore, the negation that the for-itself makes itself be in the presence of being has an ecstatic future dimension: it is insofar as I am not what I am (an ecstatic relation to my own possibilities) that I have not to be being-in-itself as the disclosing actualization of the this .  Therefore, I am present to the this within the incompleteness of a detotalized totality.  What consequence does this have for the disclosure of the this ? Insofar as I am always beyond what I am, and forth-coming in relation to myself, the this to which I am present appears to me to be something I surpass toward myself.  The perceived is in the first place what I surpass: within the circuit of ipseity, it is like a conductor—and it appears within the limits of that circuit.  To the extent that I become the negation of the this , I flee from this negation toward a complementary negation, whose fusion with the first one should make apparent the in-itself that I am.  And this possible negation has a connection of being with the first one; it is not anonymous but precisely the negation which is complementary to my presence to the thing.  But as the for-itself constitutes itself, as presence, as a non-positional consciousness ( of ) self, it becomes acquainted from outside itself, through being, with what it is not; it recuperates its being on-the-outside in the mode of “reflection-reflecting.” The complementary negation that it is as its own possibility is therefore a presence-negation, which means that the for-itself has it to be, as a non-thetic consciousness (of) self, and as a thetic consciousness of being-beyond-being.  And the being-beyond-being is not connected to the present this by any old external relation but rather by a precise connection of complementarity, which stands as the exact correlative of the relation of the for-itself and its future.  And in the first place the this is disclosed within the negation of a being who makes itself not be this —not simply as a presence but as a negation which is forth-coming in relation to itself, which is its own possibility beyond its present.  And this possibility, haunting pure presence as its out-of-reach meaning and as what is missing from it in order for it to be in itself , is in the first instance like a projection of the present negation, in the shape of a commitment.  Indeed, any negation that did not have the meaning of a commitment—beyond itself, in the future, as a possibility coming toward it, and in whose direction it flees from itself—would lose all its meaning as a negation.  What is negated by the for-itself is negated “with the dimension of the future,” whether it is a matter of an external negation—“this one is not that one,” “this chair is not a table”—or of an internal negation, directed on itself.  To say “this one is not that one” is to posit the externality of the this in relation to the that —either for now and the future, or strictly within the “now”—but in that case the negation has a provisional character, which constitutes the future as pure externality in relation to the present determination, “this one and that one.” In both cases, the meaning comes to the negation on the basis of the future; all negation is ecstatic.  Insofar as the for-itself negates itself in the future, the this of which it makes itself the negation is disclosed as coming toward it from the future.  The possibility that consciousness non-thetically is—as a consciousness (of) being able not to be this —is disclosed as the potentiality of the this to be what it is.  An object’s first potentiality, as the correlative of commitment, an ontological structure of negation, is permanence , which constantly comes toward it from the depth of the future.  The disclosure of the table as a table requires a permanence of the table, which comes to it from the future and which is not a purely observed given but a potentiality.  This permanence, moreover, does not come toward the table from a future situated within the temporal infinite: infinite time does not yet exist; the table is not disclosed as having the possibility of being a table indefinitely.  The time that is in question here is neither finite nor infinite; potentiality merely makes the dimension of the future appear.  But negation’s forth-coming meaning is to be what is missing from the for-itself’s negation in order for it to become a negation in itself .  In this sense the negation, in the future, makes the present negation more precise.  It is in the future that the exact meaning of what I have not to be is disclosed, as the correlative of the exact negation that I have to be.  The polymorphous negation of the this , in which the green is formed out of a “daylight-coarseness” totality, only acquires its meaning if what it has to be is a negation of the green, i.e., of a green-being whose ground tends toward the equilibrium of an absence of any differentiation: in short, the absent-meaning of my polymorphous negation is a narrower negation—of a green that is more purely green, against an undifferentiated ground.  In this way, the pure green comes, from the depth of the future, to the “green-daylight-coarseness” as its meaning.  Here we are in a position to grasp the meaning of what we referred to as abstraction .  The existent does not possess its essence as some present quality.  The existent is even a negation of the essence: the green is never green.  But the existent’s essence comes to it from the depth of the future, like a meaning that is never given and which always haunts it.  It is the pure correlative of my negation’s pure ideality.  In this sense, no operation of abstraction ever occurs—if we mean by that some psychological and affirmative act of selection, on the part of a constituted mind.  Far from it being the case that we abstract specific qualities on the basis of things, we ought on the contrary to see that abstraction—as an original mode of being of the for-itself—is necessary for there to be things in general, and a world.  The abstract is a structure of the world that is necessary for something concrete to arise, and the concrete is only concrete to the extent that it moves in the direction of its abstraction, and becomes acquainted, through that abstraction, with what it is: the for-itself is, in its being, disclosing-abstracting.  From this standpoint we can see that permanence and abstraction are just one and the same.  If the table, as a table, has the potentiality of permanence, the table has that potentiality to the extent that it has being a table to be.  For any this , permanence is the pure possibility of conforming to its essence.  We saw, in Part Two of this work, that the relation between the possible that I am and the present I am fleeing from is that of a missing item to that from which it is missing.  14 The ideal fusion—in the shape of an unrealizable totality—of the missing item with what that missing item is missing from, haunts the for-itself and constitutes it in its very being as a nothingness of being.  That, as we said, is the in-itself-for-itself—or value.  But, at the unreflective level, the for-itself does not apprehend this value thetically: it is only a condition of being.  If our deductions are correct, this constant indication of an unrealizable fusion should not appear as a structure of unreflected consciousness but as a transcendent indication of an ideal structure of the object.  This structure can easily be disclosed: as the correlative of the indication of a fusion of the polymorphous negation with the abstract negation that is its meaning, a transcendent and ideal indication must be disclosed—the indication of a fusion of the existing this with its forth-coming essence.  And this fusion must be such that the abstract is what founds the concrete and, at the same time, the concrete founds the abstract: in other terms, the concrete “flesh and bones” existence must be the essence; the essence must be produced as a total concretion, which is to say with the full richness of something concrete, without, however, our being able to find within it anything other than itself in its complete purity.  Or, alternatively, the form must be in relation to itself—and completely—its own matter.  And conversely, the matter must be produced as absolute form.  This impossible and constantly indicated fusion of essence and existence belongs neither to the present nor to the future; rather, it indicates the fusion of past, present, and future and it presents itself as a synthesis of the temporal totality that is to be performed .  It is value, as transcendence: we refer to that as “ beauty .” Beauty represents therefore an ideal state of the world, correlative to an ideal realization of the for-itself, in which the essence and existence of things are disclosed as identical to a being who, within this disclosure itself, might merge with itself into the absolute unity of the in-itself.  It is precisely because the beautiful is not only a transcendent synthesis to be performed but can be realized only within and through a totalization of ourselves—that is precisely why we want the beautiful, and why we apprehend the universe as lacking the beautiful, to the extent to which we apprehend ourselves as a lack.  But the beautiful is no more a potentiality of things than the in-itself-for-itself is a possibility that belongs to the for-itself.  It haunts the world as an unrealizable.  And to the extent that man realizes the beautiful within the world, 15 he realizes it in the mode of the imaginary.  This means that, in aesthetic intuition, I apprehend an imaginary object through an imaginary realization of myself as a totality that is in-itself and for-itself.  Ordinarily the beautiful, in the form of value, is not made thematically explicit as value-out-of-reach-of-the-world.  It is implicitly apprehended in things, as an absence; it is implicitly disclosed through the world’s imperfection .  These original potentialities are not the only ones to characterize the this .  Indeed, to the extent that the for-itself has, beyond its present, its being to be, it discloses a “beyond” of the qualified being, which comes from the depth of being to the this .  Insofar as the for-itself is beyond the crescent, alongside a being-beyond-being consisting in the future full moon, the full moon becomes the crescent moon’s potentiality; insofar as the for-itself is beyond the bud, alongside the flower, the flower is the bud’s potentiality.  The disclosure of these new potentialities implies an original relation to the past.  It is in the past that the link between the crescent moon and the moon, between the bud and the flower, has been gradually uncovered.  And the for-itself’s past is a body of knowledge for the for-itself.  But this knowledge does not remain as an inert given.  Doubtless, it lies behind the for-itself—unknowable as such, and out of reach.  But, within the ecstatic unity of its being, it is on the basis of this past that the for-itself becomes acquainted with what it is in the future.  My knowledge about the moon escapes me as something thematically known.  But I am it and my way of being it is—at least in some cases—to make what I am no longer come to me, in the form of what I am not yet.  I am this negation of the this —the this I have been—in a twofold way: in the mode of no-longer-being, and of not-yet-being.  I am beyond the crescent moon as the possibility of a radical negation of the moon as a full disc and, correlatively to my turning back from my future negation toward my present, the full moon returns toward the crescent in order to determine it as a this in the shape of a negation: it is what is missing from it, and what it is made to be—as a crescent—by what it lacks.  Thus, within the unity of a single ontological negation, I attribute the dimension of the future to the crescent insofar as it is a crescent—in the form of permanence, and essence—and I constitute it as a crescent moon by my determining movement back to it, from what it is missing.  In this way the range of potentialities is constituted, extending from permanence all the way to powers .  Human-reality, by surpassing itself toward its own possibility of negation, makes itself be that through which the negation involved in surpassing arrives in the world.  It is through human-reality that lack comes to things, in the form of “power,” “incompleteness,” “suspension,” 16 and “potentiality.” Nonetheless, the lack’s transcendent being cannot have the nature of the ecstatic lack within immanence.  Let us take a closer look.  The in-itself does not have its own potentiality to be in the mode of the not-yet.  The disclosure of the in-itself is, from the outset, a disclosure of the identity of indifference.  The in-itself is what it is without any ecstatic dispersion of its being.  It does not therefore have its permanence, or its essence, or what is missing from it, to be —in the way that I have my future to be.  My arising in the world makes potentialities arise, correlatively.  But these potentialities are frozen even as they arise: externality eats into them.  Here we meet again that twofold aspect of the transcendent which, in its very ambiguity, has given birth to space: a totality that becomes dispersed into relations of externality.  Potentiality returns to the this , from the depth of the future, in order to determine it, but the relation of the this as in-itself to its potentiality is a relation of externality.  The moon’s crescent is determined as lacking , or as deprived of something—in relation to the full moon.  But at the same time it is disclosed as fully being what it is, this concrete sign in the sky, in need of nothing in order to be what it is.  The same goes for this bud, or for this match, which is what it is, whose match-being meaning remains external to it—which may of course burst into flame but which, at present, is this stick of white wood with a black tip.  Even though the potentialities of the this are strictly connected to it, they present themselves as in-itselfs, and they are in a state of indifference in relation to it.  This inkwell may be broken, thrown against the marble of the fireplace where it will smash.  But this potentiality is entirely cut off from it, because it is only the transcendent correlative of my possibility of throwing it against the marble of the fireplace.  In itself it is neither breakable nor unbreakable: it is .  That does not mean I am able to consider a this apart from any potentiality at all: rather, and merely because I am my own future, the this is disclosed as endowed with potentialities; to apprehend the match as a stick of white wood with a black tip is not to strip it of all potentiality but simply to confer new potentialities on it (a new permanence, a new essence).  In order for the this to be entirely dispossessed of its potentialities, it would be necessary for me to be a pure present, which is inconceivable.  Only the this has various potentialities that are equivalent , i.e., in a state of equivalence in relation to it.  For this reason: the this does not have these to be .  In addition, my possibles are not; rather, they possibilize themselves, because my freedom eats into them from the inside.  In other words, whatever my possible may be, its opposite is equally possible.  I might break this inkwell, but I can just as well put it away in a drawer; I may target the full moon, beyond the crescent—but I can just as well lay claim to the crescent’s permanence as such.  In consequence, the inkwell is endowed with possibles that are equivalent: to be put away in a drawer, to be broken.  This crescent moon may be an open curve in the sky, or a disc that is still outstanding.  We may call these potentialities—which return to the this without having been been by it, and without it having them to be—its “ probabilities ,” to mark their existing in the in-itself’s mode of being.  My possibles are not; they possibilize themselves.  But probables do not “probabilize” themselves; as probable, they are in itself .  In this sense, the inkwell is , but its being-an-inkwell is a probable, because the inkwell’s “having-to-be-an-inkwell” is a pure appearance that merges immediately into a relation of externality.  These potentialities or probabilities, which are being’s meaning—beyond being—precisely because they are in-itself beyond being , are nothings .  The inkwell’s essence is been as the correlative of the for-itself’s possible negation, but it is not the inkwell, and it is not being: insofar as it is in itself, it is a hypostasized, reified negation, which is to say that it is precisely a nothing; it belongs to the sleeve of nothingness that surrounds and determines the world.  The for-itself reveals the inkwell as an inkwell.  But this revelation occurs beyond the inkwell’s being, in this future which is not: all of being’s potentialities, ranging from permanence right up to a qualified potentiality, are defined as what being is not yet , without it ever being the case that it truly has them to be .  Here again, knowledge neither adds nor takes anything away from being; it does not adorn it with any new quality.  Knowledge makes it the case that there is being, by surpassing it toward a nothingness that maintains only negative relations of externality with it: this pure nothingness which characterizes potentiality also stands out in the procedures of the sciences which, aiming to establish relations that are straightforwardly external, radically eliminate anything potential, i.e., essence and powers.  But, on the other hand, its necessity as a signifying structure of perception appears with sufficient clarity to excuse us from insisting on it: indeed, scientific knowledge can neither overcome nor eliminate the potentializing structure of perception; on the contrary, it presupposes it.  We have tried to show how the for-itself’s presence to being discloses it as a thing .  And, for the sake of clarity in our exposition, we have had to demonstrate the thing’s various structures successively: the this and spatiality, permanence, essence, and potentialities.  It goes without saying, however, that this successive exposition does not correspond to any real priority of some of these moments over others: in arising, the for-itself makes the thing disclose itself, with the totality of its structures.  Besides, there is not a single one of them that does not imply all of the others: the this does not even have a logical priority over its essence; on the contrary, it presupposes it and, conversely, any essence is an essence of “this.” In the same way, the this as quality-being can appear only against the ground of the world, but the world is a collection of thises ; and the world’s disintegrating relation to the thises , and of the thises to the world, is spatiality.  Here, therefore, we find no substantial form, no principle of unity to stand behind the phenomenon’s modes of appearing: everything is given at once, without any primacy.  For the same reasons, it would be a mistake to conceive of the representational as having any kind of primacy.  Our descriptions have led us, in fact, to emphasize the thing in the world , and we might be tempted by this to believe that the world and the thing are disclosed in a kind of contemplative intuition: only subsequently would objects be placed in relation to each other, in a practical order of equipmentality.  We can avoid such a mistake if we bear fully in mind that the world appears within the circuit of ipseity.  The world is what separates the for-itself from itself or—to use an expression from Heidegger—it is on the world’s basis that human-reality becomes acquainted with what it is.  17 This project of the for-itself toward itself, which constitutes ipseity, is in no way a contemplative repose.  It is a lack, as we have said, but not a given lack: it is a lack that has its own lack to be, in relation to itself.  Indeed, we need fully to appreciate that any noted lack—or any in-itself lack—will vanish into externality: we showed this in the foregoing pages.  But a being that constitutes itself as a lack can only determine in relation to that thing, over there, what it lacks and what it is —by means, in short, of constantly separating itself from itself toward the itself that it has to be.  In other words, the lack can only be, in relation to itself, its own lack as a lack that is refused : the only properly internal connection between that from which… is missing, and what is missing from it, is refusal.  Indeed, to the extent to which the being from which… is missing is not what is missing from it, we can grasp a negation within it.  But if this negation is not to vanish into pure externality—and, with it, all possibility of negation in general—its foundation will lie in the necessity, for the being from which… is missing, to be what is missing from it.  In this way, the foundation of negation is a negation of negation.  But this foundation-negation is no more a given than the lack of which it is an essential moment: it is as having to be.  The for-itself makes itself be its own lack, in the phantom unity of the “reflection-reflecting,” i.e., it projects itself toward that lack as it refuses it.  It is only as a lack to be eliminated that the lack can be an internal lack for the for-itself, and the for-itself can only actualize its own lack by having it to be, i.e., by being a project toward its elimination.  In this way, the for-itself’s relation to its future is never static or given; instead, the future comes to the for-itself’s present to determine it at its heart, insofar as the for-itself is already over there, in the future, as its elimination.  The for-itself can only be a lack here if it is an elimination of the lack over there : but it has this elimination to be, in the mode of not-being.  It is this original relation that allows us subsequently to note some particular lacks as lacks that are suffered or endured .  This relation, in general, is the foundation of affectivity: this is also what we may try to explain psychologically by installing those idols and phantoms within the psyche known as drives or appetites .  These drives, or forces, which are violently inserted within the psyche, are not comprehensible in themselves, because the psychologist presents them as in itself existents—which means that their very character as force is contradicted by their inner repose of indifference, and that their unity is dispersed into a pure relation of externality.  We can grasp them only in the capacity of a projection into the in-itself of an immanent relation of being between the for-itself and itself, and this ontological relation is, precisely, the lack .  But this lack cannot be thetically grasped and known by unreflective consciousness (any more than it can appear to impure and complicit reflection, which apprehends it as a psychological object, i.e., as a drive or a feeling).  It is accessible only to purifying reflection, with which we are not concerning ourselves here.  At the level therefore of consciousness of the world, the lack can appear to itself only as a projection, with a transcendent and ideal character.  Indeed, if what is missing from the for-itself is an ideal presence to a being-beyond-being, we grasp that being-beyond-being from the outset as missing-from-being.  Thus the world is disclosed as haunted by absences to be actualized, and each this appears with a retinue of absences indicating and determining it.  These absences are basically no different from potentialities.  Only we have a better grasp of their meaning.  In this way, the absences indicate the this as a this and, conversely, the this points toward the absences.  As each absence is being-beyond-being—i.e., absent in-itself—each this points toward another state of its being, or toward other beings.  But, of course, this organization into referring structures is frozen and petrified into in-itself, since here we are dealing with the in-itself; all these mute and petrified references, falling back into indifference and isolation at the very moment in which they arise, resemble the stony smile and empty eyes of a statue.  So the absences appearing behind things do not appear as absences to be presentified by things.  Nor can we say that they are disclosed as having to be actualized by me , since my ego is a transcendent structure of the psyche that only appears to reflective consciousness.  18 They are pure demands, raising themselves in the midst of the circuit of ipseity as “voids to be filled.” Only their character as “voids to be filled by the for-itself” manifests itself to unreflected consciousness by a direct, personal urgency that is lived as such, without being either connected to a someone or thematized.  It is precisely in and through our living them as requirements that what we called (in another chapter) their “ipseity” is revealed.  They are tasks ; and this world is a world of tasks .  In relation to these tasks, their indicated this is, at the same time, the “ this of these tasks”—i.e., the unique in-itself determined by them, and indicated as being able to fulfill them—and something that can in no way have these tasks to be , since it is in the absolute unity of identity.  We will call this connection within isolation, this relation of inertia within the dynamic, the “relation of means to end.” It is a degraded-being-for, pounded by externality, and whose transcendent ideality can be conceived of only as the correlative of the being-for that the for-itself has to be.  And the thing—insofar as it rests within the calm beatitude of indifference and yet at the same time points, beyond itself, toward tasks to fulfill through which it is acquainted with what it has to be—is the instrument, or implement.  The original relation of things with each other—the relation that appears on the foundation of the quantitative relation of the thises —is, therefore, the relation of equipmentality .  And this equipmentality is not subsequent, or subordinated, to the structures that were previously pointed out: in one sense, it presupposes them, and in another sense they presuppose it.  A thing is not first a thing, in order later to be an implement; it is not first an implement, in order later to be disclosed as a thing: it is an implement-thing.  Nonetheless, it is true that it will be discovered, in the scholar’s subsequent inquiry, as purely a thing , i.e., as stripped of all equipmentality.  But that is because the scholar is concerned only to establish pure relations of externality; moreover, the result of this scientific inquiry is that the thing itself, stripped of all instrumentality, ends up evaporating into absolute externality.  We can see the extent to which Heidegger’s formula needs to be corrected: of course the world appears within the circuit of ipseity, but, as the circuit is non-thetic, the annunciation of what I am cannot itself be thetic.  To be in the world is not to escape out of the world toward oneself but to escape out of the world toward a “beyond” of the world that is the future world.  What the world announces to me is uniquely “worldly.” It remains the case that, if the equipment’s infinite referral never refers to a for-itself that I am, the equipmental totality is the exact correlative of my possibilities.  And as I am my possibilities, the order of equipment in the world is the image, projected into the in-itself, of my possibilities, i.e., the image of what I am.  But I can never decipher this worldly image: I adapt to it in and through action; in order for me to be an object for myself, the scissiparity of reflection is required.  It is not therefore through inauthenticity that human-reality becomes lost in the world; rather, being-in-the-world is, for human-reality, radically to lose itself within the world through the very disclosure that makes it the case that there is a world; it is to be endlessly referred, from one implement to another, without even the possibility of a “What is the point?”—without any recourse, other than the revolution of reflection.  It will not help to object that the chain of “For whats?” must depend on some “For whose sakes?” ( Worumwillen ).  19 Of course, that “ Worumwillen ” refers us to a structure of being that we have not yet elucidated: being for-the-Other.  And the “for whom” constantly appears behind our instruments.  But this “ for whom ”—whose constitution is different from “for what”—does not break the chain.  It is simply a link and, seen from the perspective of instrumentality, it does not enable us to escape the in-itself.  Of course, these work clothes are for the worker.  But that is so the worker can repair the roofing without getting dirty.  And why should we not get dirty? In order not to spend the largest part of our salary on buying clothes.  Because, in point of fact, this salary is allocated to the worker as the minimum amount of money that will allow him to provide for his keep, and he “keeps himself,” precisely, in order to be able to use the power of his labor to repair roofs.  And why must he repair the roof? In order for it not to rain in the office, where the employees are doing the accounts, etc.  This does not mean we must always apprehend the Other as an instrument of some particular type but merely that, when we consider the Other on the basis of the world, we do not thereby escape from the infinite referral of equipmental structures.  Thus, to the extent to which the for-itself is its own lack in the shape of refusal, being is disclosed to it, as the correlative of its impulse toward itself, against the ground of the world as implement-thing, and the world arises as the undifferentiated ground of referring structures of equipment.  The set of these references lacks any meaning, but that is in the sense in which—at this level—there is not even any possibility of raising the problem of meaning.  We work in order to live, and we live in order to work.  The question of the meaning of the “work-life” totality—“Why am I working, I who am living?” “Why am I living, if it is in order to work?”—can be raised only at the level of reflection, since it implies a discovery of the for-itself by itself.  What remains to be explained is why equipmentality, as the correlative of the pure negation that I am, is able to arise in the world.  How is it that I am not a sterile and endlessly repeated negation of a this , qua pure this ? How is it possible for this negation to disclose a plurality of tasks that are my image, if I am nothing but the pure nothingness that I have to be? To answer this question, we must remember that the for-itself is not purely and simply a future that comes toward the present.  It also has its past, in the form of “was,” to be.  And the ecstatic implication of the three temporal dimensions is such that, if the for-itself is a being that is acquainted, through its future, with the meaning of what it was, it is—in the same movement of arising—also a being that has its “ will be ” to be, within the perspective of a specific “was” from which it flees.  In this sense, we must always seek the meaning of a temporal dimension elsewhere , in another dimension: we named this the “ diaspora ,” because the unity of diasporic being is not a pure belonging-together that is given ; it is the necessity of actualizing the diaspora by becoming conditioned—over there, and outside—within the unity of itself.  Therefore the negation that I am and which discloses the this has therefore to be in the mode of “was.” This pure negation—which, as a simple presence , is not—has its being behind it, as its past, or facticity.  As such, we must acknowledge that it can never be a negation without roots.  But it is, on the contrary, a qualified negation—if we understand this to mean that it drags its qualification behind it, as the being that it has not to be in the form of “was.” Negation arises as a non-thetic negation of the past, in the mode of an internal determination, insofar as it becomes a thetic negation of a this .  And it arises within the unity of a twofold “being for,” since negation is produced in existence—in the reflection-reflecting mode—as a negation of a this , in order to escape from the past that it is, and it escapes from the past in order to extricate itself from the this by fleeing from it in its being, toward the future.  We called this the for-itself’s point of view on the world.  This point of view, which can be equated with facticity, is an ecstatic qualification of negation as the original relation to the in-itself.  But, on the other hand—as we have seen—whatever the for-itself is, it is what it is in the mode of “was,” as an ecstatic belonging to the world.  I do not rediscover my presence in the future, since the future delivers the world to me as the correlative of a forth-coming consciousness; rather, my being appears to me in the past, albeit non-thematically, within the framework of being-in-itself—i.e., it appears in relief, in the midst of the world.  Of course, this being is still consciousness of…, i.e., for-itself; but it is a for-itself that has frozen into in-itself and, in consequence, it is a fallen consciousness of the world, in the midst of the world.  The meaning of realism, naturalism, and materialism lies in the past: these three philosophies all describe the past as if it were present.  The for-itself is therefore a twofold flight from the world: it escapes its own being-in-the-midst-of-the-world as presence to the world from which it flees.  The flight’s free and final term is the possible.  The for-itself cannot flee toward something transcendent that it is not but only toward a transcendent that it is.  This is what removes any possibility of there being an end to this constant flight.  If I may use an image that is somewhat demotic—but helps to capture my thought—I would remind the reader of the donkey pulling a cart behind him, trying to catch a carrot that someone has fixed to the end of a stick, which is in turn attached to the shafts.  Every attempt made by the donkey to catch the carrot has the effect of moving the harnessed cart forward in its entirety—along with the carrot itself, which remains always at the same distance from the donkey.  In this way, we run after a possible that is brought into view precisely by our running—a possible that is nothing other than our running, and which by that very fact is determined as being out of reach.  We are running toward ourselves and we are, in consequence, the being that cannot ever be reunited with itself.  In one sense, our running lacks any meaning, since its final term is never given but invented and projected even as we run toward it.  And, in another sense, we cannot withhold from it the meaning that it rejects, since, despite everything, the possible is the for-itself’s meaning.  Instead, our flight has—and has not—meaning.  Now, in this very flight from the past that I am, toward the future that I am, the future is prefigured in relation to the past at the same time as it endows the past with all its meaning.  The future is the past, surpassed as the given in-itself toward an in-itself that could be its own foundation, i.e., an in-itself that would be, insofar as I would have it to be.  My possible is the free reclamation of my past—insofar as this reclamation may salvage my past, by founding it.  I flee from the being without any foundation that I was, toward the founding act that I can be only in the mode of “ would be .” In this way, the possible is the lack that the for-itself makes itself be; i.e., it is what is missing from the present negation, insofar as it is a qualified negation (which means a negation whose quality lies outside itself, in the past).  As such, it is itself qualified.  But it is not qualified in the manner of something given , which could be its own quality in the mode of the in-itself, but rather as an indication of the reclamation that might found the ecstatic qualification that the for-itself was .  In this way, thirst is three-dimensional: it is a present flight from a state of emptiness that the for-itself was.  And it is this flight itself which confers on the given state its character as a void or lack: in the past, the lack could not be a lack, because the given can only “lack” something if it is surpassed toward… by a being that is its own transcendence.  But this flight is a flight toward… and this “toward” is what gives it its meaning.  As such, it is itself a lack that makes itself —which is to say it is, at the same time, the constitution in the past of the given as a lack or a potentiality, and a free reclamation of the given by a for-itself making itself a lack in the form of a reflection-reflecting, i.e., as consciousness of the lack.  And that toward which the lack flees, insofar as it becomes conditioned in its being-a-lack by what is missing from it, is the possibility that it should be a thirst that is no longer a lack, i.e., the possibility of repletion-thirst.  The possible points toward repletion, and value—as the phantom-being that surrounds the for-itself and penetrates it throughout—points toward a thirst that might simultaneously be given —in the way that “it was”—and reclaimed—as the play of the reflection-reflecting ecstatically constitutes it.  What we have here, as we can see, is a plenitude that determines itself as thirst.  The ecstatic past-present relation provides the sketch of this plenitude with the structure of “thirst” as its meaning—and the possible that I am must provide its actual density, its body of plenitude, as repletion.  In this way, my presence to being, which determines it as a this , is a negation of the this , insofar as I am also a lack qualified in relation to this .  And to the extent to which my possible is a possible presence to being-beyond-being, the qualification of my possible discloses a being-beyond-being—as the being to which my co-presence will be co-presence—that is strictly connected to a forth-coming repletion.  Thus absence is disclosed within the world as a being to be actualized, insofar as this being is the correlative of the possible-being that is missing from me .  The glass of water appears as having-to-be-drunk, i.e., as the correlative of a thirst that is apprehended non-thetically, and in its very being, as having to be satisfied.  But these descriptions, which all imply a relation to the world’s future, will become clearer if we turn now to show how, on the foundation of original negation, world-time—or universal time—is disclosed to consciousness.  IV.  WORLD-TIME 20 Universal time enters the world through the for-itself.  The in-itself does not have temporality at its disposal precisely because it is in-itself, and because temporality is the unitary mode of being of a being that is constantly for itself at a distance from itself.  The for-itself, on the contrary, is temporality, but it is not a consciousness of temporality, except when it puts itself into the “reflective-reflected” relationship.  In the unreflective mode it discovers temporality on being, which is to say outside.  Universal temporality is objective .  (A) The past The this does not appear as a present that will thereafter become past and which, hitherto, was in the future.  As soon as I perceive it, this inkwell already exists in three temporal dimensions.  Insofar as I apprehend it as something permanent—that is, as its essence—it is already in the future, even though I am not present to it in my current presence but as forth-coming-to-myself.  And by the same token I can only apprehend it as having already been there, in the world, insofar as I was already there, myself, as present.  In this sense, no “synthesis of recognition” 21 exists, if we take that to mean a progressive operation of identification which, through its successive ordering of the “nows,” confers on the perceived thing its duration .  Instead, the explosion of the for-itself’s temporality extends alongside the entirety of the in-itself it discloses, as if it ran the length of an immense and monotonous wall, whose end was out of sight.  I am this original negation that I have to be, in the mode of “not-yet” and “already,” alongside the being that is what it is.  If, therefore, we suppose that consciousness arises within an immobile world alongside one, and just one, being, that is unchangeably what it is, this being will be disclosed with an unchangeable past and future that do not require any “operation” of synthesis, and which are not distinct from that very disclosure.  An operation would be necessary only if the for-itself had to retain and, at the same time, to constitute its own past.  But from the simple fact that it is its own past, as well as its own future, it follows that the disclosure of the in-itself can only be temporalized.  The this is disclosed temporally, not because it is refracted through an a priori form of inner sense but because it is disclosed to a disclosing whose very being is temporalization.  Nonetheless, the atemporality of being is represented in its disclosure itself: insofar as we apprehend the this through and within a temporality that temporalizes itself, it appears from the outset as temporal; but, insofar as it is what it is, it refuses to be its own temporality, and only reflects time.  In addition, it reflects back the internal ecstatic relation—which is at the source of temporality—as a pure objective relation of externality.  Therefore permanence, as a compromise between timeless unity and the ecstatic unity of temporalization, appears purely as a sliding-by of in-itself instants, small nothingnesses that are separated from each other and reunited by a relation of simple externality, at the surface of a being that preserves an atemporal unchangeability.  It is not therefore true that the atemporality of being escapes us: it is, on the contrary, given in time ; it founds the way of being of universal time.  Therefore, insofar as the for-itself “was” what it is, the implement or thing appears to it as having already been there.  The for-itself can be presence to the this only as a presence that was : every perception is, in itself and without any “operation,” a recognition.  Now, what gets revealed, through the ecstatic unity of the past and the present, is one identical being.  That being is not apprehended as being the same in the past and at present but as being it .  22 Temporality is only an organ of sight.  And yet the this was already the “it” that it is.  In this way, it appears as having a past.  Only it refuses to be this past; it merely has it.  Insofar as it is apprehended objectively, therefore, temporality is a pure phantasm, because it is given neither as the for-itself’s temporality, nor as the temporality that the in-itself has to be.  At the same time, since the transcendent past is— qua transcendent—in-itself, it cannot be what the present has to be; it is isolated in a phantom Selbstständigkeit .  And as each moment of the past is a “having-been-present,” this isolation continues, right inside the past.  So the immutable this is disclosed through an infinite flickering and fragmentation of phantom in-itselfs.  That is how this glass or this table is revealed to me: they do not endure; they are ; and time flows over them.  Of course, it might be objected that I do not see them changing.  But that introduces, irrelevantly, a scientific perspective.  That perspective has no justification, and actually our perception contradicts it: the pipe, the pencil, all of those beings that are delivered in their entirety within each of their “profiles,” and whose permanence is wholly indifferent to the multiplicity of profiles, are also, although they are disclosed within temporality, transcendent in relation to any temporality.  The “thing” exists all at one go, as a “form,” i.e., as a whole that is not affected by any of the superficial and parasitic variations we can see in it.  Each this is disclosed with a law of being that determines its threshold , which means the degree of change at which it would simply cease to be what it is, in order to be no longer.  And this law of being by which “permanence” is expressed is immediately disclosed as a structure of its essence; it determines a limit-potentiality of the this —the limit at which it disappears from the world.  We will return to this.  Thus the for-itself apprehends temporality on being, as a pure reflection playing on being’s surface, without any possibility of changing it.  A scholar may use the term “homogeneity” to fix in a concept this absolute and phantom negatity of time.  23 But the transcendent grasp of the ecstatic unity of the temporalizing for-itself on the in-itself occurs as the apprehension of an empty form of temporal unity, without any being that founds this unity by being it.  In this way, therefore, at the level of the present-past, that curious unity of absolute dispersion which is external temporality appears—in which each before and after is an “in-itself” isolated from the others by its indifferent externality, and yet in which these instants are gathered together within the unity of being of a single being, that common being—or Time—being nothing other than the dispersion itself, conceived in terms of necessity and substantiality.  This contradictory nature can appear only on the twofold foundation of the for-itself and the in-itself.  On that basis, scientific thinking—insofar as it aims to hypostasize the relation of externality—conceives of the in-itself (that is, thinks it emptily) not as something transcendent that we aim at through time but as a content that passes from instant to instant or, better still, as a multiplicity of contents each of which is external to the others and absolutely similar to them.  Our attempt to describe universal temporality has, so far, adopted the hypothesis that nothing can come from being, apart from its timeless immutability.  But some thing does, precisely, come from being, which we will call—for want of anything better—“abolitions” and “apparitions.” 24 These abolitions and apparitions ought to be the subject of a purely metaphysical clarification, not an ontological one, because we cannot conceive of their necessity on the basis either of the for-itself’s structures of being, or of those of the in-itself: their existence is that of a contingent and metaphysical fact.  We cannot know precisely what comes from being in the phenomenon of apparition, since that phenomenon already concerns a temporalized this .  However, experience teaches us that various thises arise and are annihilated and, as we know now that perception discloses the in-itself and, outside the in-itself, nothing , we cannot regard the in-itself as the foundation of these arisings and annihilations.  In addition, we can see clearly that the principle of identity, as the in-itself’s law of being, requires that any abolition and apparition should be completely external to the in-itself that has appeared or been abolished—otherwise the in-itself would at the same time be and not be.  An abolition cannot be the degradation of being that consists in an end .  Only the for-itself can know such degradations because it is, in relation to itself, its own end.  As a quasi-affirmation in which the affirming is thickened by what it affirms, being exists without internal finitude, in the distinctive tension of its “self-affirmation.” Its “up-until-now” is completely external to it.  In this way, an abolition does not imply the necessity of an after —which can be manifest only in a world, and for a for-itself—but of a quasi-after .  We may express this quasi-after like this: being-in-itself is unable to effect any mediation between itself and its nothingness.  Similarly, apparitions are not adventures of some being that appears.  We will find the self-anteriority presupposed by any adventure only in the for-itself, whose apparition and its end are internal adventures.  Being is what it is.  It is, without “setting itself to be,” without childhood, or youth: what has appeared is not its own innovation; it is being from the outset, without any relation to a “before” that it has to be in the mode of not-being it, and in which it would have to be as a pure absence.  Here again we encounter a quasi-succession, i.e., the complete externality of what has appeared in relation to its nothingness.  But in order for this absolute externality to be given in the form of “there is,” there must already be a world, i.e., the arising of a for-itself.  The in-itself’s absolute externality in relation to the in-itself ensures that the sheer nothingness that is the quasi-before of an apparition or the quasi-after of an abolition cannot even form part of the plenitude of being.  It is only within the unity of a world, and against the ground of the world, that a this that was not can appear, and that the relation-of-an-absence-of-relation instantiated by externality can be disclosed; the nothingness of being that consists in anteriority in relation to something that has appeared and that “was not” can enter into a world only retrospectively, through a for-itself that is its own nothingness and its own anteriority.  In this way, the arising and the annihilation of a this are ambiguous phenomena: here again, what the for-itself brings into being is a pure nothingness, a not-yet-being and a being-no-longer.  Their foundation is neither the being in question nor the world as a totality that we apprehend before or afterward .  But on the other hand, as the movement of arising is disclosed in the world by a for-itself that is its own “before” and “after,” an apparition is given from the outset as an adventure; we grasp the this that has appeared as already being there in the world, as its own absence, insofar as we were ourselves already present to a world from which it was absent.  Thus a thing can arise from its own nothingness.  What is involved here is not a conceptual way of seeing, belonging to the intellect, but a primary structure of perception.  The Gestalttheorie experiments show clearly that a pure apparition is always apprehended as dynamically arising; what has appeared comes running into being, from the depths of nothingness.  At the same time, we find here the origin of the “principle of causality.” The paradigmatic example of causality is not the negation of what has appeared as such, as Meyerson would have it; nor is it our assigning of a permanent external connection between two phenomena.  Primarily, causality is an apprehension of what has appeared before it appears—as being already there in its own nothingness, in order to prepare its apparition.  Causality is simply the primary apprehension of the temporality of what has appeared as an ecstatic mode of being.  But the event’s adventurous character, like the ecstatic constitution of an apparition, disintegrates within the act of perception itself: the “before” and “after” are frozen within its in-itself-nothingness, and what has appeared is frozen in its indifferent identity; the non-being, in the previous instant, of what has appeared is disclosed as the indifferent plenitude of the being in existence at this instant; the relation of causality disintegrates into a pure relation of externality between some thises which preceded what appeared, and the thing that appeared itself.  In this way the ambiguity of an apparition and a disappearance stems from the fact that they are given, like the world, like space, like potentiality and equipmentality, like universal time itself, in the guise of totalities that are constantly disintegrating.  Such, therefore, is the world’s past, made up of instants that are homogeneous and connected to each other by a pure relation of externality.  Through its past, as we have noted already, the for-itself merges into the in-itself.  In the past the for-itself that has become in-itself shows itself as a being in the midst of the world: it is ; it has lost its transcendence.  And its being is thereby pastified within time: between the past of the for-itself and the past of the world that was co-present to it, there is no difference other than that the for-itself has its own past to be.  In this way there is only one past, which is being’s past, or the objective past within which I was.  My past is a past within the world, a belonging to the totality of past being that I am, and that I flee.  In other words, for one of the dimensions of time there is a coincidence between the ecstatic temporality that I have to be and world-time, as pure given nothingness.  It is through the past that I belong to universal temporality; it is through the present and the future that I escape from it.  (B) The present The for-itself’s present is a presence to being and, as such, it is not.  But it is a disclosure of being.  The being that appears to the presence is given as being in the present .  That is the reason why the present is given antinomically: as not being, when it is lived, and as being the unique measure of being, insofar as it is disclosed as being what it is in the present.  It is not that being does not overflow the present, but this overabundance of being can be grasped only through the organ of apprehension that is the past, i.e., as what no longer is.  This book on my table, therefore, is in the present and it was (identical with itself) in the past.  In this way the present is disclosed through original temporality as universal being, and at the same time it is nothing—nothing more than being; it is purely a sliding alongside the length of being, purely a nothingness.  The foregoing remarks might seem to suggest that nothing comes from being in the present, apart from its being.  That would be to forget that being is disclosed to the for-itself either as motionless or as moving, and that the two notions of movement and rest stand in a dialectical relation.  Now, we cannot derive movement ontologically, either from the nature of the for-itself, or from its fundamental relation to the in-itself, or from anything that we can discern from the outset within the phenomenon of being.  A world without movement is conceivable.  Of course, it is not possible to envisage the possibility of a world without change—other than as a purely formal possibility—but change is not movement.  A change is an alteration in a quality of a this ; as we have seen, it comes about as a whole, through the arising or disintegration of a form.  Movement, on the contrary, presupposes the permanence of quiddity.  If a this had at the same time to be translated from one place to another and, during this translation, 25 to undergo a radical alteration in its being, that alteration would negate the movement, since nothing moving would remain.  A movement is purely a change in place of a this that remains otherwise unaltered—as the principle of the homogeneity of space clearly shows.  Movement therefore—which cannot be derived from any essential characteristic of the existents in presence, which was denied by Eleatic ontology, and which required, in Descartes’s ontology, the well-known recourse to a “fillip” 26 —has exactly the value of a fact; it participates in the entire contingency of being and must be accepted as something given.  Of course, as we will soon see, for “there to be” movement, a for-itself is necessary, which makes it especially difficult to allocate exactly what, in pure movement, comes from being.  But in any case it is beyond doubt that the for-itself, here as elsewhere, adds nothing to being; here, as elsewhere, it is the pure Nothing, against whose ground a movement detaches itself.  But if we are prohibited, by movement’s very nature, from attempting any deduction of it, it is at least possible, and even necessary, to provide a description .  How, therefore, should the meaning of movement be conceived? We believe that movement is simply an affection of being, because any moving body is found, after its movement, to be as it previously was.  So obvious has it seemed that movement is added on to being without modifying it that it is often claimed as a principle that the translation of a figure does not deform it; and it is certain, as we have seen, that the quiddity of the this remains unaltered.  Nothing typifies this conception better than the resistance encountered by a theory such as Fitzgerald’s “contraction” theory, 27 or Einstein’s “variations in mass,” because they seemed especially to attack what a moving body’s being consists in.  From this, the principle of the relativity of movement obviously follows—which makes perfect sense if movement is an external characteristic of being and if it is not determined by any internal structural change.  In that case, movement becomes a relation between being and its surroundings that is so external that to say that a being is moving and its surroundings at rest is equivalent to saying that the surroundings are moving and the being under consideration is at rest.  From this point of view, movement appears neither as a being nor as a mode of being but as a relation from which all substance has been stripped.  But the fact that a moving body remains identical to itself at the points of departure and arrival—that is, in the two stases that frame the movement—does not in any way prejudice the question of what it was while it was moving .  One might as well say that the water boiling in an autoclave undergoes no change while it is boiling, because it presents the same characteristics when it is cold, and when it has been cooled.  Nor should we allow the fact that we can assign different successive positions to a moving body while it is moving, and that it appears to be the same in each position, to detain us—for these positions define the space that is crossed, not the movement itself.  On the contrary, it is this mathematical tendency to treat a moving body as if it were a body at rest that could be displaced along a line without ceasing to be at rest that lies at the origin of the Eleatic aporias.  So we must regard the claim that being—whether it be moving or at rest—remains unchanged in its being, as a mere postulate that we cannot accept without criticism.  To subject it to such criticism, let us return to the Eleatics’ arguments, and especially the argument about the arrow.  We are told that an arrow, in passing through the position AB, “is” exactly as an arrow at rest would be, with the extremity of its tip at A and the extremity of its tail at B.  That seems obvious if we accept that movement is superadded to being and that, in consequence, nothing can show us whether some being is moving or at rest.  In brief, if movement is an accident of being, movement and rest are indiscernible.  The arguments that are usually opposed to the most famous Eleatic aporia—that of Achilles and the Tortoise—carry no weight here.  What use is it to object that the Eleatics relied on the infinite divisibility of space without taking equal account of the infinite divisibility of time? The question here is not about position , or an instant, but about being .  We will come closer to conceiving the problem correctly if we answer the Eleatics by saying that they were not talking about movement but rather about the space that subtends movement.  But this is to limit ourselves to pointing out the question without solving it.  What, in fact, must the being of a moving body be in order for its quiddity to remain unaltered and for it nonetheless to be, in its being, distinct from a being at rest? If we try to clarify our resistance to Zeno’s arguments, we will note that it has at its origin a specific and natural conception of movement: we accept that the arrow “passes” in AB, but it seems to us that to pass in a place cannot be equivalent to staying there , i.e., to being there .  But in general we are seriously confused, because we judge that the moving body only passes in AB (in other words, that it never is there) and at the same time we continue to suppose that, in itself, it is .  So, at the same time, it will be in itself, and it will not be in AB.  That is the origin of the Eleatics’ aporia: How could the arrow not be in AB, since, in AB, it is ? In other words, in order to avoid the Eleatic aporia, we have to give up the generally accepted premise, according to which a moving body retains its being-in-itself.  To merely pass, in AB, is to-be-in-passage.  What is it, to pass? It is to be in a place and, at the same time, to not be there.  There is no moment at which we can say that the being in passage is here, unless we suddenly stop it; but neither can we say that it is not, or that it is not there , or that it is elsewhere .  Its relation to its place is not a relation of occupation .  But we saw earlier that the place of a this at rest was its external relation to the ground, insofar as this relation may collapse into a multiplicity of external relations with other thises when the ground itself disintegrates into a multiplicity of figures.  28 The foundation of space is therefore the reciprocal externality that enters into being through the for-itself, and whose origin is that being is what it is.  In brief, it is the being which defines its place by revealing itself to a for-itself as indifferent to the other beings.  And this indifference is nothing but its very identity, its want of ecstatic reality, insofar as it is apprehended by a for-itself that is already present to other thises .  By virtue solely of the fact, therefore, that the this is what it is, it occupies a place, and it is at a site—which is to say that the for-itself sets it into the relation with the other thises of having no relations with them .  Space is a nothingness of relation, 29 apprehended as a relation by the being that is its own relation.  The fact that something passes in some place, rather than being there, can therefore be interpreted only in terms of being.  In other words, a being, 30 having founded a place, no longer suffices to found its place: it only sketches it out; the for-itself is unable to establish its relations of externality with other thises because it is necessary for it to establish these on the basis of a this that is .  These relations, however, cannot be annihilated, because the being on whose basis they get established is not a pure nothingness.  It is just that, in the very “now” in which they are established, it is already external to them; i.e., new relations are already being disclosed, simultaneously with their disclosure, whose foundation is the extant this , and whose relation with the earlier relations is one of externality.  But this continuous externality of the spatial relations that define a being’s place can only be founded in the fact that the this under consideration is external to itself.  And indeed, to say that the this “passes” in a place is to convey that, while it is still there, it is there no longer; in other words, its relation to itself is not an ecstatic relation of being but purely a relation of externality.  Thus, a “place” may exist, to the extent to which some this is disclosed as external to the other thises .  And in this place there can be a passage , or transition, to the extent to which the being is no longer defined by this externality but is, on the contrary, external to it.  In this way movement is the being of a being that is external to itself.  In the case of movement, the only metaphysical question to be raised is the question of self-externality.  How should we understand this? In moving, nothing about a being changes, when it passes from A to B.  Therefore its quality, insofar as that represents the being disclosed to the for-itself as this , is not transformed into another quality.  Movement can in no way be assimilated to becoming; it does not alter a quality in its essence , any more than it actualizes it.  The quality remains exactly what it is; what changes is its way of being.  This red ball, rolling along the billiard table, does not cease to be red but it is no longer this red that it is in the same way as when it was at rest: it remains suspended between abolition and permanence.  In fact, insofar as, by being already at B, it is external to what it was in A, its redness has been annihilated—but insofar as it is beyond B, in C, it is external to that same annihilation.  In this way it escapes from being through its abolition, and it escapes abolition through its being.  Therefore we encounter within the world a category of thises whose peculiarity is never to be—yet without thereby being nothingnesses.  The only relation that the for-itself is able to apprehend from the outset in these thises is the relation of self-externality.  For, as externality is nothing , it is necessary, in order for there to be any “self-externality,” for there to be some being that is its own relation to itself.  In brief, it is impossible to define purely in terms of the in-itself anything that is revealed to the for-itself as self-externality.  Such an externality can be encountered only by a being that is already, over there , what it is here —in other words, by a consciousness.  That self-externality, which appears as a sheer sickness in being—in other words, as the impossibility of certain thises being at the same time themselves and their own nothingness—must be registered by something resembling a nothing within the world , i.e., something like a substantivized nothing.  In fact, since self-externality is not at all ecstatic, the relation that a moving body has to itself is purely a relation of indifference, and can be encountered only by a witness.  It is an abolition unable to accomplish itself, and an apparition unable to accomplish itself.  This nothing—which measures and exhibits self-externality—is the trajectory , as the constitution of externality within the unity of a single being.  A trajectory is a line that draws itself, i.e., a synthetic unity suddenly appearing in space, an illusion that immediately collapses into the infinite multiplicity of externality.  When the this is at rest, space is ; when it is moving, space generates itself , or becomes .  A trajectory can never be , because it is nothing : it vanishes immediately into pure relations of externality between various places, i.e., into the simple externality of indifference, or spatiality.  And movement is not any more than that; it is the least-being of a being that does not manage fully either to abolish itself or to be; it is indifferent externality, arising right in the heart of the in-itself.  This pure vacillation in being is a contingent adventure of the being.  31 The for-itself can grasp it only through the ecstasis of time, and in an ecstatic and permanent identification of the moving body with itself.  No operation is presupposed by this identification, nor, in particular, any “synthesis of recognition”; rather, for the for-itself, it is nothing other than the ecstatic unity of being of the past with the present.  In this way temporal identification of the moving body with itself—through the constant positing of its own externality—allows its trajectory to be disclosed; i.e., it makes space arise in the form of an evanescent becoming.  Through movement, space is generated within time; the movement draws the line, like a contour of self-externality.  The line vanishes at the same time as the movement, and this phantom temporal unity of space continually merges into timeless space, i.e., into the pure multiplicity of dispersion that is without becoming.  The for-itself is, in the present, a presence to being.  But the eternal identity of the permanent prevents us from grasping this presence as something reflected in things because, within permanence, nothing differentiates what is from what was.  Without movement, therefore, the present dimension of universal time would elude us.  It is movement that determines universal time as the pure present.  That is because, in the first place, it reveals itself as a present vacillation: already, in the past, it is nothing more than an evanescent line, a trail that erases itself; in the future, it is not at all, because it cannot be its own project; it is like the constant progression of a crack in the wall.  Moreover, its being has the instant’s elusive ambiguity, because we can say neither that it is, nor that it is not; in addition, it barely appears before it is already surpassed, and external to itself.  It is therefore the perfect symbol of the for-itself’s present: the self-externality of the being that can neither be, nor not be, sends back to the for-itself the image—projected onto the plane of the in-itself—of a being that has to be what it is not, and not to be what it is.  The difference lies entirely in what separates self-externality—in which being is not in order to be its own externality but which, on the contrary, “is being” through an ecstatic witness’s identification—from the pure temporalizing ecstasis in which being has to be what it is not.  Through some moving thing, the for-itself becomes acquainted with its present; it is its own present in simultaneity with the current movement; it is movement that performs the task of actualizing universal time, insofar as the for-itself is acquainted with its own present by the present of the moving body.  This actualization highlights the instants’ reciprocal externality, as the present of the moving body is defined—owing to the very nature of movement—as something external to its own past, and as an externality in relation to that externality.  Time’s infinite division is founded in this absolute externality.  (C) The future The original future is the possibility of this presence that I have to be, beyond the real, to an in-itself beyond the real in-itself.  My future brings with it, as a future co-presence, the draft of a future world and, as we have seen, it is that future world that is disclosed to the for-itself that I will be, and not the for-itself’s own possibilities (which can be known only from the standpoint of reflection).  Since my possibles—as the meaning of what I am—also arise as a “beyond” of the in-itself to which I am present, the future of the in-itself that is revealed to my future is directly and closely connected with the reality to which I am present.  It is the present in-itself, but changed—because my future is nothing more than the possibilities of my presence to an in-itself that I will have changed.  Thus the world’s future is disclosed to my future.  It is made out of the range of potentialities, starting from the simple permanence and pure essence of a thing, and extending all the way to powers.  As soon as I determine a thing’s essence, whether I apprehend it as a table or an inkwell, I am already over there, in the future.  That is, first, because its essence can only be something co-present to my later possibility of being-nothing-but-this-negation and, next, because its permanence and its very equipmentality as a table or inkwell refer us to the future.  We have sufficiently developed these points in the previous sections to make any further emphasis unnecessary.  The only thing we would like to note is that, as soon as anything appears as an implement-thing, some of its structures and properties will be lodged from the outset in the future.  From the moment the world and its thises appear, there is a universal future.  Only we noted earlier that every future “state” of the world remains foreign to it, in the full, reciprocal externality of indifference.  There are some futures of the world that are defined by chances , and become autonomous “probables”; they do not make themselves probable but they are as “probables,” as already constituted “nows” whose content is clearly determined but not yet actualized.  These futures belong to every this , or set of thises , but outside them.  What, then, is the universal future ? We must regard it as the abstract frame for that hierarchy of equivalences constituted by the futures : as a container of reciprocal externalities that is, itself, external; as the sum of the in-itself that is, itself, in itself.  In other words, whichever “probable” carries the day, there is and there will be one future but, in consequence, this future—which is indifferent and external to the present, and composed of “nows,” each of which is indifferent to the other, and joined through the substantivized before-after relation (insofar as this relation, emptied of its ecstatic character, no longer means anything more than an external negation)—is a series of empty containers joined together by the unity of their dispersion.  So sometimes the future appears as a crisis and a threat, insofar as I place the future of a this closely beside its present through the project of my own possibilities beyond the co-present; and sometimes this threat breaks up into pure externality and I no longer apprehend the future other than purely as a formal container, indifferent to whatever fills it and homogeneous to space, as simply a law of externality; and, finally, sometimes it shows itself as an in-itself nothingness, insofar as it is pure dispersion beyond being.  Thus the temporal dimensions through which the timeless this is given to us—in its very a-temporality—take on new qualities when they appear on the object: being-in-itself, objectivity, indifferent externality, absolute dispersion.  Time, insofar as it is encountered by an ecstatic self-temporalizing temporality, is always a self-transcendence, and refers from “before” to “after” and from “after” to “before.” But, insofar as Time is grasped on the in-itself, this self-transcendence is not what Time has to be ; it is been, within Time.  Time’s cohesion is a pure phantom, an objective reflection of the for-itself’s ecstatic project toward itself and of human-reality’s cohesion within movement.  But if we consider time by itself, this cohesion has no raison d’être ; it collapses immediately into an absolute multiplicity of instants which, considered separately, lose their temporal nature entirely and are straightforwardly reducible to the total a-temporality of the this .  In this way, time is a pure in-itself nothingness, which can seem to have a being only through the very act in which the for-itself passes through it, in order to make use of it.  Further, this being is that of a distinctive figure, detached against time’s undifferentiated ground—which we may call a lapse of time.  Indeed, our primary apprehension of objective time is practical : it is in being my possibilities, beyond co-present being, that I encounter objective time as the correlative, in the world, of the nothingness that separates me from my possible.  From this point of view, time appears as a finite and structured form, within an indefinite dispersion; a lapse of time is time that is compressed within an absolute decompression, and it is the project of ourselves toward our possibles that brings the compression about.  Of course, this compressed time is a form of dispersion and separation, because it expresses within the world the distance that separates me from myself.  But on the other hand, as I only ever project myself toward a possible through an ordered series of dependent possibles that are what I have to be, in order to be…, and as their non-thematic and non-positional disclosure is given in the non-positional disclosure of the major possible toward which I am projecting myself, time is disclosed to me as an objective temporal form, as a spacing out of “probables”: this objective form, or lapse , is akin to the trajectory of my act.  In this way time appears through trajectories .  But, just as spatial trajectories will decompress and collapse into pure static spatiality, so does a temporal trajectory collapse, the moment it is not simply lived as something objectively underpinning 32 our awaiting of ourselves.  In fact the “probables” that I encounter naturally tend to isolate themselves into in itself probables and to occupy a strictly separated fraction of objective time; the lapse of time vanishes, and time is revealed as a shimmering of nothingness at the surface of a strictly a-temporal being.  V.  KNOWLEDGE This rapid sketch of the world’s disclosure to the for-itself allows us to conclude.  We can concede, to idealism, that the for-itself’s being is knowledge of being, but we will add that there is a being to that knowledge.  The for-itself’s being is identical with the being of knowledge, but that is not because knowledge is the measure of being but because the for-itself becomes acquainted with what it is by the in-itself—or, in other words, because it is, in its being, a relation to being.  Knowledge is nothing other than the presence of being to the for-itself, and the for-itself is only the nothing that actualizes this presence.  In this way, knowledge is, in essence, an ecstatic being and it thereby merges into the for-itself’s ecstatic being.  The for-itself does not exist in order subsequently to know; nor can we say that it only is insofar as it knows (or is known), as that would make being disappear into an ordered infinity of particular instances of knowledge.  Rather, there is the absolute arising of the for-itself in the midst of being and beyond being, on the basis of the being that it is not, and as the negation of that being and the nihilation of itself—and knowledge is that initial and absolute event.  In brief, through a radical reversal of the idealist position, knowledge is absorbed into being: it is neither an attribute, nor a function, nor an accident of being; but there is only being.  From this point of view it appears necessary to abandon the idealist position entirely and, in particular, it becomes possible to envisage the for-itself’s relation to the in-itself as a fundamental ontological relation; we will even be able, at the end of this book, to regard this articulation of the for-itself in relation to the in-itself as the constantly moving sketch of a quasi-totality to which we can give the name Being .  From the point of view of this totality, the for-itself’s arising is not only the event that is absolute for the for-itself; it is also something that happens to the in-itself , the in-itself’s only possible adventure.  It is just as if the for-itself, through its very nihilation, constituted itself as a “consciousness of…,” i.e., as if it escaped, through its very transcendence, that law of the in-itself by which any affirmation is thickened by what it affirms.  The for-itself, through its negation of itself, becomes an affirmation of the in-itself.  The intentional affirmation is like the reverse side of the internal negation; there can be an affirmation only through a being that is its own nothingness, and only of a being that is not the being that affirms.  But then, within the quasi-totality of Being, the affirmation happens to the in-itself; the in-itself’s adventure is to be affirmed.  The in-itself could not effect this affirmation as an affirmation of itself without destroying its being-in-itself; what happens to the in-itself is the affirmation’s actualization by the for-itself; it is like a passive ecstasis of the in-itself that leaves it unchanged and yet which occurs within it, and on its basis.  It is as if there were a passion of the for-itself, which loses itself in order for the “world” affirmation to happen to the in-itself.  And, certainly, this affirmation exists only for the for-itself; it is the for-itself itself, and disappears when it does.  But it is not in the for-itself, because it is the ecstasis itself, and, if the for-itself is one of its terms (the affirming), the other term—the in-itself—is really present to it; it is outside, on being, that there is a world to be disclosed.  To the realist, on the other hand, we will concede that what is present to the knowing consciousness is being itself, and that the for-itself adds nothing to the in-itself, other than the very fact that there is  il y ait  an in-itself, i.e., the affirmative negation.  Indeed, the task we have set ourselves is to show that the world and the implement-thing, space, quantity, and universal time are pure substantivized nothingnesses, and change nothing about the pure being that is revealed through them.  In this sense, everything is given, present to me without distance and in the entirety of its reality: nothing of what I see comes from me; there is nothing apart from what I see or what I am able to see.  Being is around me everywhere, and it seems that I can touch it, and grasp it; representation , as a psychological event, is a pure philosophers’ invention.  But this being that “invests” me from all sides and from which I am separated by nothing is separated from me by precisely nothing ; and, because it is nothingness, this nothing is impassable.  “There is” being because I am a negation of being; and worldhood, spatiality, quantity, equipmentality, and temporality arrive in being only because I am a negation of being.  They add nothing to being: they are purely nihilated conditions of the “there is”; they only actualize the “ there is .” But these conditions—which are nothing —separate me from being more radically than any prismatic distortions, through which I might still hope to be able to uncover it.  To say “there is being” is to say nothing—and yet it effects a complete metamorphosis, because there is being only for a for-itself.  It is not through some quality of its own that being is relative to the for-itself, nor is it through its being, and we hereby escape Kantian relativism; rather, it is through its “there is,” since in its internal negation the for-itself affirms that which cannot affirm itself, and knows being as it is , where that “as it is” cannot belong to being.  In this sense, the for-itself is at the same time an immediate presence to being and slides, like an infinite distance, between being and itself.  The fact is that knowledge’s ideal is “being-what-we-know,” and its original structure is “not-being-what-we-know.” Worldhood, spatiality, etc., only express this not-being.  Thus, I find myself everywhere—between being and myself—as the nothing that is not being.  The world is human.  We can see the highly distinctive position of consciousness: being is everywhere, against me and around me, weighing on me and besieging me, and I am constantly referred from being to being: that table there is being, and nothing more; that rock, that tree, that landscape, are being and, other than that, nothing .  I want to grasp that being and I no longer find anything but myself .  That is because knowledge, which is intermediate between being and non-being, directs me to absolute being when I want it to be subjective and, when I believe I am grasping the absolute, it directs me to myself.  The very meaning of knowledge is what it is not and is not what it is, for, to know being as it is, it would be necessary to be that being, but there is only an “as it is,” because I am not the being that I know and, if I were to become it, the “as it is” would vanish and I would no longer be able even to think it.  What we have here is neither a skepticism—which would presuppose, precisely, that the “ as it is ” belongs to being—nor a relativism.  Knowledge places us in the presence of the absolute and there is a truth to knowledge.  But this truth, although it delivers us nothing more and nothing less than the absolute, remains strictly human.  It may seem surprising that we have discussed the problem of knowledge without raising the question of the body and the senses, or even addressing it once.  It is no part of our intention to fail to recognize, or to neglect, the body’s role.  But what matters before anything else, in ontology just as everywhere else, is to observe a strict order in one’s discussion.  Now the body, whatever its function may be, appears in the first place as something known .  We cannot therefore relate knowledge back to it, or discuss it, before we have defined knowledge; nor can we, in any way or by any means, derive knowledge in its fundamental structure from it.  In addition, the body—our body—has as its distinctive characteristic the fact that it is essentially known by the Other : what I know is the body of others, and my knowledge of my body essentially comes from the way in which others see it.  In this way the nature of my body directs me to the existence of the Other, and to my being-for-the Other.  With it, I encounter another mode of existence for human-reality, which is as fundamental as being-for-itself, and which I will call “being-for-the-Other.” If I want to describe man’s relation with being exhaustively, it will be necessary now to turn to the study of this new structure of my being: my for-the-Other.  For human-reality is obliged to be, in its being, and in one and the same arising, for-itself-for-the-Other.  Index I NDEX A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print edition.  Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning of that page in the print edition.  For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your reading system’s search function.  Page numbers followed by “n” refer to notes, with the note number following “n.” A absence: being, definition of 6 ; of consciousness 15 , 21 ; gifts as 770 ; how my consciousness appears to the Other 106 ; immediacy 253 ; missed-in-itself 141 ; negation 41–42 , 62–64 , 249–252 ; Other’s presence 352 , 378–379 , 380 , 456–457 , 552 ; sexual desire 518 ; see also lack absolute extension 640–641 abstraction: Baldwin’s “abstract emotions” 443 ; characteristics 685 ; negation’s origin 34 , 44–45 , 47 ; as permanence 272 ; psychological analysis 725 , 729–731 ; qualities 266–267 , 272 absurdity: action 574 , 626 , 627 , 628 , 725 , 729 ; death 692 , 695 , 699 , 701 , 702 , 710 ache 448–451 , 452 , 473–475 Actaeon complex 750 , 752 action: absurdity 574 , 626 , 627 , 628 ; arising of 78 , 565–566 , 573 , 575 , 582–583 , 603 ; as being 233 , 622–623 , 742 , 776 ; body-for-itself 430–439 ; common 544–545 ; determinism 569 , 573–574 , 577–578 ; freedom as first condition of 569–628 ; intentionality 569–574 , 584 , 592 , 593 , 623–625 ; metaphysical observations 808 ; motives and reasons 570–575 , 585–593 , 604 , 608 , 615 , 618 , 621 ; as possession 597 , 747–749 , 752–759 , 760 , 764–765 , 766 , 768 ; psychoanalysis 599–600 , 604 ; questioning 35–37 , 38–39 , 44 , 57 , 59–60 , 62 , 65 , 72 , 255 , 800–801 ; ultimate possibility 602–604 , 607 , 615 , 689 , 693 , 719 ; voluntary actions and passions 579–585 ; we-subject 557–559 , 562 ; see also freedom ; original project actuality-potentiality dualism 3 , 153 , 185 Adler, Alfred 99 , 601 , 618–619 , 780 , 794 adversity of things 661–662 , 663 , 712 ; see also coefficient of adversity ; resistances affectivity: affective intentionality 509 ; and consciousness of the body 442–444 , 451 , 452 ; Freud’s psychophysiological drives 600 ; lack 278–279 ; motives and reasons 588 , 589 ; Other, objectification of 391 , 393 , 394 affirmation: being 26 , 27 , 37 , 47 , 48 , 80 , 289 , 301–302 , 702 ; of flesh 523 ; irony 88 ; judgments 37 , 43–44 ; lying 88–89 ; of the Other 387 , 388 , 391 , 403 , 497 , 540 ; possibility 154 ; reflection 224 , 225 ; temporality 170 , 206 , 215 , 289 Alain 10 , 11 , 62 , 94 , 716 alienation: in being seen 358 , 360–361 , 362 , 365 , 366 , 367 , 374 , 375 , 383 , 387–388 , 393 , 402 , 408 ; concrete relations with the Other 479 , 481 ; guilt 540 ; hatred 540 , 541 , 542 , 543 ; indifference 504 , 505 ; love 491 , 495 , 496 , 497 , 498 , 500 , 742 ; masochism 500 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 470–471 , 472 , 473 , 474 , 475 ; possession 767 ; sadism 534 ; situation 676 , 681 , 682 , 683–684 , 689 , 705–706 , 710 , 711 ; “we”-object 546 , 547 , 548–549 , 551 , 554 ; we-subject 557 alimentary intuition 263 ambition 588–589 , 596 , 622 , 626 , 727 Amiel, Henri Frédéric 783n48 analogical assimilation 471–472 anatomy 417–418 , 464 , 465 anger 133 , 233 , 234 , 313–314 , 318 , 398–399 , 442 , 462 , 467 , 546 , 617 anguish: in the apprehension of nothingness 51 , 66 , 69–74 , 76 , 77 , 79 , 81 , 82 , 85 ; as consciousness of freedom 66 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 76 , 78 , 79–80 , 81 , 135 , 578 , 607–608 , 810–811 ; ethical 77–79 ; and fear 66–67 , 72 ; flight strategies 80–85 , 86 ; future, in the face of 67–70 , 81–82 , 191 ; and Heidegger’s Dasein 51 ; past, in the face of 70–72 , 81–84 ; rarity of and nonreflective consciousness 74–77 , 79 , 80 ; and responsibility 722 ; toward death 732–733 animality 779–780 Anselm of Canterbury 7 anti-values 791 , 792 anxiety 470 , 488–489 , 531 , 542 , 620 , 790 ; see also anguish apparitions 288–289 , 290 , 296 appearance: food 796 ; motives 73 ; my facticity 628 , 664 , 681 ; phenomena 1–7 , 21 , 22 , 29 , 808 ; physiognomy 466 ; sadness 105 ; situation 649 , 657 , 658 , 659 ; viscosity 785 , 788 ; see also beauty ; color ; ground ; perception ; sensory knowledge appropriation see possession arbitrary transcendence 557–558 , 562 Aristotle 3n4 , 3n5 , 148 , 153 , 157 , 617n27 assimilation of the Other’s freedom 481 , 482–501 ; language 494–495 ; love 485–493 , 494 , 495–499 , 531 ; masochism 499–501 associationism 195 attitudes toward the Other 479–482 , 501–502 , 536–539 ; see also assimilation of the Other’s freedom ; second attitude toward the Other (objectification) Audiberti, Jacques 779 authenticity 117 , 130 , 281 , 338–339 , 383 , 394 , 689 , 693–694 , 711 , 732–733 B Bachelard, Gaston 435 , 777 , 778 , 779 , 780 , 781 Bacon, Francis 629n36 , 750 bad faith 87–117 ; action of the past 171 ; anguish 85 , 86 , 722 ; cowardice example 112–113 , 116 ; faith of 113–117 ; fidelity to my past 656 ; forms of 97–113 ; Heidegger’s transcendence 343 ; homosexual man example 108–110 ; impure reflection 231 ; indifference to others 504 ; and lying 88–93 , 113 ; moral perspectives 810 ; pride 394 ; psychoanalysis 91–97 , 618 , 619 , 620 ; sadness example 105 ; and the serious man 753 ; shame, flight from 358 ; sincerity example 101 , 106–108 , 109 , 110–112 ; transcendence-facticity 99–100 ; waiter in the café example 102–104 ; woman on a date example 97–98 , 100 Baldwin, James Mark 443 Balzac, Honoré de 700 , 702 Barrès, Maurice 698 , 740n13 beauty 108 , 273–274 , 394 , 684–685 , 792 behaviorism 622 , 623 being-for-itself: in bad faith 101 ; death 710 ; determination as negation 255–263 ; ecstases of 403 ; equipmentality 277–285 , 771 ; initial positing of 25 , 29 , 121 ; knowledge 245 , 246–255 , 300–303 ; metaphysical observations 798–808 ; motives 135 , 572 , 574 , 577 , 588–589 ; potentiality 270–277 ; quality 263–267 , 373 ; quantity 269–270 ; third ecstasis see being-for-the-Other ; world-time 285–300 ; see also freedom ; immediate structures (of the for-itself) ; original project ; temporality being-for-the-Other: attitudes toward the Other 479–482 , 501–502 , 536–539 ( see also assimilation of the Other’s freedom ; second attitude toward the Other (objectification)) ; and bad faith 101 ; and the being of value 149 ; conflict 483 ; death 170 , 174 , 701–702 , 704 , 706–707 , 708 , 710 ; existence of the Other, theory of 344–346 ( see also the Look ); Hegel 325–336 , 337 , 345 , 347 , 370 , 385 , 405 , 490 ; Heidegger 336 , 337–344 ; Husserl 3 , 106 , 322–325 , 328 , 336 , 337 , 352 , 370 ; inferiority complex 602 ; limits of freedom 682 , 684 ; metaphysical observations 403–408 , 806–807 ; nihilation, as a dimension of 201 ; possession 768 ; solipsism 309–321 , 322 , 324 , 325 , 344 , 370 ; see also being-with ; body being-in-itself: affirmation and negation 26 , 28 , 37–38 , 261 ; bad faith 98 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 111 , 116 , 117 , 577 ; characteristics of 25–29 ; death 702 ; and determination as negation 259 , 260 , 261 , 262–263 ; equipmentality 279 , 280 , 281 , 283 , 284 ; and freedom 577–578 , 580 , 581 , 590 , 592 , 598 , 599 , 603 , 606 , 607 , 608 , 624 , 627 ; and knowledge 245 , 246–255 , 301 , 303 , 800 ; metaphysical observations 798–808 ; negation’s origin 34 , 35 , 37 , 57 , 58 , 80 , 82 , 85 , 480 ; ontological proof of 20–23 , 659 ; Other, concrete relations with 480 , 481 , 483 , 484 , 499 , 500 , 503 , 540 , 565 , 566 ; Other’s existence 309 , 318 , 319 , 320 , 346 , 359 , 364 , 373 , 386 , 389 , 396 , 405 , 406 , 408 , 480 ; possessed object 747 , 751 , 754–755 , 759 , 760 , 766–767 , 774 ; potentialities 270 , 273 , 274 , 275 , 276 ; quality 264 , 266–267 , 268 , 778 , 779 , 782 , 785 , 786 , 787 , 788 , 789 , 790 , 791 , 794 , 795 , 796 , 797 ; quantity 269 ; temporality 285 ; temporality (future) 155 , 184–185 , 186 , 187 , 188 , 191 ; temporality (past) 167–168 , 174 , 175 , 177 , 178 , 179 , 180 , 190–191 ; temporality (present) 181 ; temporality (reflection) 221 , 227 , 230 , 231 , 232 , 234 , 235 , 236 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 242 , 592 ; temporality (static) 195 , 197 , 198 , 199 , 200–205 ; temporality (world-time) 285 , 286 , 287 , 288–289 , 290 , 294 , 296 , 297 , 298 , 299 ; see also facticity ; immediate structures (of the for-itself) ; lack being-in-the-midst-of-the-world: assimilation of the Other’s freedom 485 , 487 , 488 , 489 , 496 ; bad faith 101 , 104 ; and being-with 338 , 549 ; body-for-the-Other 454 , 458 ; freedom as the first condition of action 581 , 590 , 599 ; my body 410 ; my existence as known by the Other 469 , 470 , 476 , 477 , 478 ; the object-other 395–400 ; Other’s look 295 , 351 , 358 , 361 , 362–364 , 366–368 , 379 , 388 , 391 , 392 , 396 , 398 , 408 ; and the quasi-multiplicity of being-in-itself 201–202 ; second attitude toward the Other (objectification) 517–518 , 519 , 520 , 525 , 534 ; senses and my being-in-the-world 427 , 429 , 436–437 , 477 ; sexual bliss 517–518 ; suffering 144 ; temporality 167 , 182 , 202 , 205 , 213 , 283 , 290 , 590 , 655 ; see also facticity being-outside 373 , 388 , 494 , 504 , 534 , 550 , 683 , 684 being-with 337–342 , 543–546 , 563–565 ; see also Mitsein ; “we”-object ; “we”-subject belief: and bad faith 113–117 ; and self-presence 123–125 , 127–128 Berger, Gaston 576 Bergson, Henri: freedom 82n54 , 83 , 84n58 , 605 , 713 ; grace 527n22 , 528 ; life 460n18 ; nothingness 44 ; situation 649 , 657 ; temporality 166 , 167 , 171 , 197n35 , 198 , 199–200 , 238 , 242 , 286n21 , 288n23 , 790 Berkeley, George 8 , 68 , 208 Béroalde de Verville, François 503 Beyle, Marie-Henri (Stendhal) 111 , 730 , 773 birth 203–205 , 439–440 , 708 , 710 , 720–721 , 793 birth place 639–640 blindness 350 , 429 , 503–505 , 696 ; see also indifference toward the Other blushing 462 , 470 body: and being-looked-at 106 , 376–377 , 392 ; first ontological dimension see body as being-for-itself (facticity) ; problem of 303 , 409–411 ; realist view of the Other 310–311 ; second ontological dimension see body-for-the-Other ; sensory knowledge of 410–411 , 425 , 440–441 , 455 , 469–470 , 475–476 , 477–478 , 793 ; sexual desire 513–516 , 518–519 , 522 , 524–525 , 526 , 531 , 751–752 ; sexual organs 505–507 , 508 , 511 , 523 , 534 , 793–795 ; third ontological dimension see third ontological dimension of the body (my existence as a body known by the Other) ; see also sexual desire body as being-for-itself (facticity) 412–453 ; action and equipmentality 430–437 , 438–439 ; birth 439–440 ; existing my body 442–453 , 595–598 , 599 , 606 ; and freedom 595–599 ; instrumentality of 440–441 ; nausea 452–453 ; non-thetic consciousness 441–442 ; phenomena as signs 413 , 442 , 460 ; relativity of being-in-the-world 413–416 ; sensory knowledge see sensory knowledge body-for-the-Other 409–411 , 413 , 453–468 ; being there modality 456–462 ; character 465–467 ; expressive behavior 462–463 ; movement 460 , 461 , 463–464 ; and my existence as a body known by the Other 471 , 472 , 475 , 476 bourgeois class 78 , 553 , 554 , 555 , 563–564 , 689 Bourget, Paul 724 , 731 Broglie, Louis-Victor-Pierre-Raymond de 414 Brummell, George Bryan (Beau) 770n37 Byzantium 570–571 C café waiter example 102–104 , 134 caress 425 , 514–516 , 517 , 522 , 524 causality 107 , 239–240 , 242 , 290 , 313–314 , 510 , 728 , 802 ; see also motives ; psychological determinism ; universal determinism censor 91 , 94–95 Chamfort, Nicolas 514n14 chance 298 , 345 , 601 , 696–697 , 721–722 character (human) 107 , 110 , 373 , 374 , 440 , 465–467 , 716–717 ; see also temperament Chardonne, Jacques 99 Chartier: Émile-Auguste (Alain) 10 , 11 , 62 , 94 , 716 Chevalier, H.  171 , 172 child development 477 , 784 , 792–793 Christianity 692 , 699 chronological order 185 , 191 , 197 , 199 , 477 , 612 , 613 , 614 , 651 cigarettes 11 , 75 , 749 ; see also smoking circuit of ipseity: appropriative bond 771–772 , 776 ; equipmentality 278 , 280 ; immediate structures of the for-itself 158 , 159–162 , 257 ; Other’s look 355 , 391 , 395–396 ; and potentiality 270–271 , 273 , 278 , 355 ; temporality 184 , 220–221 , 230 , 257 , 698 Claparède, Édouard 165 , 168 class 134 , 440 , 459 , 572 , 629 , 668 , 680 , 689 class consciousness 552–555 , 563–564 ; see also laboring community Clovis (Merovingian ruler) 585–586 , 587–589 coefficient of adversity: being-with 552 , 553 , 561 ; equipmentality 435–436 , 440 ; and freedom 602 , 608 , 629 , 630 , 632 , 637–638 , 657–658 , 714 ; Other’s body 455 , 503 , 517n16 collective consciousness 545 collective rhythm 339–340 , 559 color 34 , 146 , 263–265 , 272 , 424 , 428 , 777 , 781 , 782 complexes: Actaeon complex 750 , 752 ; bad faith 91 , 92 , 93–94 , 96 ; existential psychoanalysis of the original project 734 , 739 , 741–742 , 744 , 794 ; inferiority complex 587 , 601–602 , 616 , 617–620 , 621 , 626 , 668 , 686 ; Jonah complex 751 , 752 ; Oedipus complex 92 , 213 , 600 , 768 complicit reflection 223 , 279 , 448 , 472 , 475 , 754 , 811 ; see also impure reflection Comte, Auguste 425 , 729 concreteness: negation’s origin 34 , 44–45 , 47 ; possession 775–776 ; possibilities 153 , 154 , 157 ; potentiality 272 , 273 , 275 ; psychological analysis 725 , 729–731 , 742 ; situation 662 , 714–715 , 775 concrete relations with the Other see attitudes toward the Other ; being-with conflict: being-for-the-Other 483 , 485 , 492 , 496 , 502 , 544 , 563 ; being-with 544 , 550 , 553 , 559–560 , 563 , 564 Les Conquérants (Malraux) 691 conquest 588–589 , 596 consolation 538–539 Constantinople 570–571 consumption 751 , 769 , 770 , 773 contingency: action 586 , 593–594 , 608 , 612 , 613 , 614 , 626 , 628 ; being and having 747 , 760 , 776 ; being-in-itself 28 , 734 , 746 ; being-with 545 , 560 ; birth 439–440 , 639 ; body-for-itself 416–417 , 436 , 439–440 , 442 , 446 , 447 , 448 , 451–453 , 599 ; body-for-the-Other 454 , 456 , 457 , 458–459 , 460 , 465 , 467 , 535 ; and the facticity of the being-for-itself 129–130 , 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 666 ; freedom as 576 , 612 , 635 ; God 132 , 484 , 797 ; human truth 675 ; implements 436 , 454 , 664 , 665 ; inferiority 621 ; language 669 ; my death 683 , 691 , 698 , 702 , 708 , 709 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 469 , 476 , 477 , 478 ; my place 639 , 640 , 644 , 646 ; my surroundings 638 , 661–662 , 663 ; non-freedom 633–634 , 635 , 636 ; original project 727 , 729 , 733 , 735 , 742 , 747 ; Other as a center of reference 683 , 691 , 713 ; Other’s existence 337 , 342 , 344 , 346 , 378 , 379 , 391 , 402–403 , 407 , 666 ; Other’s freedom, assimilation of 451 , 482 , 483 , 484 , 490–491 , 498 ; past 178 , 179–180 , 206 , 648 ; qualities 263 , 451 , 782 , 789 ; and the question of why there is being 801 ; reflection 221 , 233 , 238 ; sadism 529 , 533 , 535–536 ; sexual desire 506–507 , 513–514 , 516 , 520 , 521 , 523–524 ; sight 426 , 427 , 441 , 615 ; situation 636 , 713 ; temporality, ontology of 202 , 203 , 206 , 214 , 216 ; value, being of 146 , 147 , 148 ; of the world 52 ; world-time 288 , 292 , 296 Cousin, Victor 124 Couturat, Louis 152 cowardice 112–113 , 116 , 622 creation 18–19 , 25–27 , 321 , 747–749 , 764–765 , 766 creationism 25–26 Crime and Punishment (Dostoyevsky) 621 crowd psychology 555–556 D Daladier, Édouard 778n42 danger: body’s instrumentality 436 ; fear and anguish 67 ; freedom 574 , 582 , 583 , 584 , 594 ; indifference 504 , 505 ; Other’s existence 331 , 332 , 366 , 375 , 391 , 436 , 455 , 485 , 492 ; sexual desire 513 ; situation 665 , 712 , 718 ; viscosity 786 , 791 Dasein 23 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 122 , 136 , 186 , 337 , 494 , 506 , 565 , 575 , 582 , 691–692 , 693–694 dead life 702–707 death: vs.  absence 379 ; absurdity 692 , 695 , 699 , 701 , 702 , 710 ; anguish toward 732–733 ; being-for-the-Other 170 , 174 , 701–702 , 704 , 706–707 , 708 , 710 ; conferring meaning on life 690 , 692 , 697–705 , 706 ; Epicurus 157n35 ; finitude 696 , 709–710 ; funeral practices 761–762 ; hatred 540 , 542 ; Heidegger’s theory of 691–694 , 701n89 , 708–709 , 711n99 ; idealism 690–691 ; incompleteness of possession 768 ; Malraux 170 , 691 , 701–702 ; the Other’s existence 327 ; past 170 , 174 , 214 , 697 , 702 ; realism 70 , 690 , 706 ; and sexual bliss 517–518 ; unrealizable 710–711 ; waiting for 692–693 , 694–701 , 707 , 708 deception 88–93 , 113 decompression of being 123 , 135 , 150 “deep-seated Self” 83 deliberation 574 , 583 , 591 , 592 , 604 depersonalization 772 Descartes, René: being-for-itself, immediate structures of 121 , 130 , 135 , 136 , 142 , 156 ; doing and having 748 , 755 ; doubt and thought 61 , 121 , 130 , 156 , 178 , 225 , 328 ; freedom 573n4 , 576 , 579 , 629 , 632 , 679 ; God 130n15 , 142 , 292 , 346 ; “memories of ideas” 246 ; nothingness 61 ; Other’s existence 345 , 346 ; phenomenon 7 , 23 , 33 ; reflection 217 , 224–225 , 412 ; temporality 136 , 162 , 167 , 167–168 , 194 , 196–197 , 198 , 199 , 217 , 237 , 605 , 609 desire: as lack 139–140 , 157–158 , 733 , 737 , 746 , 759 , 776 ; and morality 810 ; possession 747 , 751–752 , 754–755 , 759–760 , 763 , 765 , 768 , 769 , 772 , 774 , 776–777 ; psychological analysis 723–730 , 733 ; to be God 735 , 746 , 747 , 754 , 809 ; see also sexual desire destruction: anguish and fear 67 ; desire 521 ; hatred 541–542 , 543 ; illness 475 ; of love 498–499 ; as possession 751 , 769–771 , 773–774 ; property rights 760 ; sadism 530 ; structure of 39–41 ; symbolism of viscosity 788 ; vehicles of 436 determinism: universal 59 , 62 , 67 , 213 , 532 ; see also psychological determinism diasporic temporality 201 , 282 Diderot, Denis 699 differentiation: sexual 506 ; see also ground disability 440 , 616–617 ; see also stammering disgust 453 , 475 , 536 , 537 , 687 , 777 , 784 , 796 doing see action Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 71 , 621 , 746 doubt 61 , 62 , 121 , 124 , 130 , 156 , 225 , 226 , 234 , 328 drives 91–92 , 94–95 , 108 , 279 , 730 , 734 , 737 , 744–745 , 751 , 752 ; see also motives dualisms, elimination of 1–5 Ducasse, Isidore-Lucien (Lautréamont) 779–780 Duhem, Pierre 3 Duns Scotus 678 duration: world-time 286 ; see also dynamic temporality ; psychological temporality dynamic temporality 193 , 208–216 E eating 750 , 751 , 770 , 794 , 795–796 education 539 ego: Freudian psychoanalysis 91–92 , 93 , 94 ; mode of being 159–160 ; Other’s existence 322 , 323 , 324–325 , 326 , 328 , 329 , 330 , 341 , 357 , 358 ; temporality 206 , 232 Einstein, Albert 292 , 691 , 808 Eleaticism 292 , 293–294 embarrassment 470–471 , 504 ; see also shame emotions 443–444 , 465 , 513 , 516–517 , 584 , 622 , 725 ; see also anger ; fear ; love ; passions empty intentions 63–64 enslavement see slavery epistemological optimism 330–334 , 336 equipmentality: action, framework of 75 , 355–356 , 569 , 580 , 584 , 587–588 , 596 , 598 , 606 , 608 , 617 ; appropriation 750 , 756 , 758 , 765 , 771 , 773 ; being-with 549 , 552 , 556 , 557 , 559 , 563 , 564 ; body-for-itself 413 , 430–436 , 437 , 438 , 439 ; body-for-the-Other 454 , 456 , 458 , 460 ; Heidegger 51 , 60 , 278 , 280 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 469–470 , 471 , 475–476 , 477 ; Other, objectification of 503 , 504 , 526–527 , 528 , 530 , 532 , 533 , 534 , 540 ; Other’s existence 338–339 , 360 , 361–362 , 364 , 395 , 396–397 , 397 , 398 , 399 , 400 ; Other’s freedom, assimilation of 487 , 489 , 498 , 500 , 501 ; situation 630 , 645 , 657–658 , 663–664 , 668 , 712 , 715 ; temporality 266 , 290 , 298 ; transcendent disclosure of 277–285 , 771 erythrophobia 470 essence: anguish 73–74 , 77 , 82–84 ; and appearance 2–3 ; bad faith 88 , 90 , 94 , 97 , 99 ; conflict 564 ; of desire 508 ; eidetic reduction 6 ; freedom 61 , 82–83 , 341 , 575 , 576 , 577 , 582–583 , 583 , 612–613 , 676 , 699 , 735 , 737 ; future possibility 154 , 272 , 273 ; Hegel’s Logic 45–46 , 47 ; of knowledge 301 ; lack 275 ; of life (as opposed to death) 705 ; of love 487 , 496 , 499 ; of man 73 , 82 , 309 , 312 , 314 , 612–613 , 676 , 699 , 735 ; mathematical 224 ; original project 676 , 699 ; Other’s existence 327 , 328 , 353 , 370 , 492 ; past 74 , 180 , 577 , 590 , 636 , 647 ; permanence 285 , 287 , 298 ; potentiality 276 , 277 , 298 ; preceded by existence 16 , 24 , 61 , 277 , 370 , 575 , 576 , 582–583 , 613 , 628 , 673 , 737 ; quality 146 , 272 , 295 , 789 , 793 ; technique 667 ; of wickedness 373 ethical anguish 77–79 , 810–811 evil 393–394 , 448n12 excuses 74 , 79 , 80 , 84 , 100 , 720 , 722 existence precedes essence 16 , 24 , 61 , 277 , 370 , 575 , 576 , 582–583 , 613 , 628 , 673 , 737 existential psychoanalysis: Bachelard 777–781 ; goal (original project) 626 , 643 , 715 , 727–728 , 731–737 , 738 , 739 , 745 , 771 , 776 , 795 ; as a means of deliverance and salvation 810 ; morality 809 ; ontological basis 746 , 760 , 772 , 777 , 779–780 , 781 ; psychology’s shortcomings 723–728 , 729–730 ; qualities 777 , 781–796 ; vs.  empirical psychoanalysis 737–746 expectations 35 , 37 , 38 , 42 , 43 , 60 , 79 expressive behavior 67 , 145 , 462–463 , 470 , 491 , 493 , 734 , 738 ; see also caress ; language extension 166 , 254–255 , 640–641 , 644 external-internal duality 1–2 , 4 , 28 external negation: defined 249 ; determination as negation 259–262 , 263 , 267–268 ; Other’s existence 319–320 , 322 , 346 , 350 , 404 ; quantity 268–269 eyes: my apprehension of my own body 410 , 425 , 477 , 478 ; Other’s look 353–354 , 355 , 367 , 375 , 376 , 377 ; pain example 444–447 , 448 ; perception 428 ; quality, apprehension of 265 ; scientific investigation of 417–418 , 420 F facticity: absurdity of freedom 628 ; and bad faith 99 , 100 ; body 456 , 457 , 458 , 459 , 460 , 464 , 465 , 467 , 468–469 , 472 , 475 , 477 ; existential psychoanalysis 781 , 782 ; fatigue as 595 , 597 ; grace 528 , 530 ; hunger and thirst 141 , 157 , 511 , 512 ; immediate structures of the for-itself 129–136 ; implications for concrete relations 479 ; love 487 , 488 , 491 ; and the missed in-itself 141 ; Other’s look 377 , 400 ; past as 178 , 190 , 202 , 203 , 283 ; sadism 530 , 531 ; self as see being-in-itself ; sexual desire 510 , 511–512 , 513 , 514 , 517 , 519–520 , 521 , 522 ; sexual difference 506 ; surrender to 597–598 ; see also situation failure: behavior of (inferiority complex) 587 , 601–602 , 616 , 617–620 , 621 , 626 , 668 , 686 ; being-for-the-Other 482 , 484–485 ; being-with 556 ; hatred 542 , 543 ; and the look of the Other 106 , 502 ; masochism 500–501 ; ontological disappointment 158 , 190 , 273 , 433 , 497–498 , 802 , 805–806 ; of reflection 221–222 , 369 , 406 ; sadism 533–534 ; sexual desire 502 , 523–526 , 532 , 537 ; shame before God 394 ; sincerity 107 ; spirit of seriousness 810 fainting 584 fascination 252 , 492 , 494 , 495 , 500 , 522 fatalism 661 fatigue 594–599 , 601 , 604 , 607 , 614 , 615 , 759 Faulkner, William 534–535 fear: and anguish 66–67 , 72 ; as freedom 584–585 ; as a motive for action 574 ; objectification of the Other 391–392 , 399–400 ; reactions to the Other’s look 360 , 362 , 366 fellow man 663–689 ; objectivity 713 ; permanence 716 feudal system 680 finite-infinite dualism 4–5 finitude: choice of inferiority 618 ; death 691 , 692 , 696 , 709–710 ; divine consciousness 152 , 197 ; the for-itself’s internal negation 384 , 438 ; freedom 438 , 439 , 440 , 645 , 683 , 688 ; love 490 Fitzgerald, George Francis 292 Flaubert, Gustave 724–726 , 727 , 728 , 746 Les Fleurs de Tarbes (Paulhan) 669 , 672 food 264 , 750 , 751 , 770 , 794 , 795–796 for-itself see being-for-itself for-itself-for-the-Other, in itself see attitudes toward the Other fragility 40 , 608 freedom: anguish 66 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 76 , 78 , 79–80 , 81 , 135 , 578 , 607–608 , 810–811 ; appropriation 518–519 , 776–777 , 781 ; bad faith 101 , 104 , 106 , 109 , 110 , 111 ; as being 61–62 , 66 , 576–577 , 579 , 594 , 604 , 625 , 626 ; body 467 , 468 ; condemned to 577 , 633 , 663 , 683 , 687 , 718 ; consoling act 538–539 ; and essence 61 , 82–83 , 341 , 583 , 612–613 , 676 , 699 , 735 ; and facticity 134 , 628 ; as first condition of action 569–628 ; grace 528 , 530 ; gratitude 542 ; guilt 540 ; hatred 540 , 541 , 542 ; indifference to Others 504 , 505 ; Leibniz’s theory of 612–614 ; Other’s existence 106 , 327 , 356 , 358 , 359 , 360 , 362 , 365 , 366 , 369 , 370 , 371 , 375 , 376 , 390–391 , 394–395 ; overview of ontology of freedom 622–628 ; and play 753 , 754 ; qualities 265 , 785 ; respect for 539–540 ; and responsibility 718–723 ; sadism 530 , 531–532 , 534–535 ; secondary possibles 606 , 614–616 ; sexual desire 518–519 ; temporalizing nihilation 65 , 84 , 86 , 191 , 572 , 573 , 575–581 , 594 , 609–611 ; ultimate possibility and original project 602–611 , 626 , 733 ; value 77–78 , 79 , 148 , 733 ; voluntary self-reform 616–622 ; “we”-object 554 , 555 ; will 581–593 , 618 , 619 , 622 ; see also assimilation of the Other’s freedom ; situation ; slavery free will 81 , 528n23 , 569 , 573 , 574 , 579–593 , 618 , 619 , 622 , 640 French Revolution 652–653 Freud, Sigmund 91–92 , 93 , 95 , 96 , 599–600 , 601 , 734 , 738 , 740 , 745n16 , 768 , 780 friendship 239 , 341 , 778 frigidity 96 fundamental project see original project funeral practices 761–762 future: action 432–433 , 439 , 572 , 574 , 591 , 594 , 602 , 607 , 608 , 609 , 613 , 614 ; beauty 273 ; dynamic temporality 211–212 ; equipmentality 278 , 280 , 282 , 283 , 284 ; giving meaning to the for-itself’s present 189 , 191 ; my past (freedom and facticity) 646 , 647–648 , 650–651 , 652 , 653 , 654 , 655 , 656 ; my place 642 , 643 , 644 ; Other’s movement 461 , 463 , 464 ; our relationship with death 697 ; phenomenology of 184–192 , 201 ; and potentiality 270 , 271–272 , 273 , 274–275 , 276 , 277 ; psychoanalysis 600 ; reflection 224 , 225 , 226 , 235 , 236–237 , 240 , 242 ; temporality, ontology of 207 , 208 ; of the world 433 ; world (universal) time 298–300 , 463 future perfect 211–212 G galley slaves example 546–547 gambler’s anguish 70–72 generosity 770–771 genitals 505–507 , 508 , 511 , 523 , 534 , 793–795 geometry 253–254 , 414 , 756 Gestalt (psychology) 41 , 56 , 209 , 258 , 260 , 349 , 351 , 364 , 399 , 420 , 449 , 462 , 614 , 622 , 808 Gide, André 102 , 339n21 , 363 , 489n3 , 587 , 605 , 621 , 673n68 , 749n19 gifts 770–771 gliding 757–758 , 786 , 789 God: absolute choice 491 ; and being-in-itself, elucidation of 25–26 ; contingency of 130 , 132 ; death 699 ; Descartes’ theory of time 130 , 196–197 ; essence of man 612–613 , 699 , 735 ; fear before 393–394 ; as the fundamental project 578 , 735 , 746 , 747 , 754 , 796–797 , 809 ; and the humanist “we” 556–557 ; metaphysical observations 805 ; as the missed totality 142 , 143 ; objecthood 382 , 393–394 , 408 ; possession as its own creation 766 , 768 ; possibilities, nature of 154 ; theories of the Other 320–321 , 382 , 393–394 , 408 , 484 good faith 90 , 91 , 114 , 115 , 116 grace 527–528 , 530 grammar 126 , 544 , 546 , 667 , 671 , 672 gratitude 541–542 ground: absence and presence 21 , 41–42 , 380 ; being and non-being 36 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 55 , 57 ; being there 134 , 294 ; being with 547 ; body 425–426 , 447–448 , 452 , 457 , 460–461 , 466 , 470 , 473 , 478 , 509 ; determination as negation 255–263 , 267–268 ; doubt 225 ; fascination 252 , 492 ; implement structures 282 , 356 , 364 , 380 , 397 , 400 , 516 , 603 , 637 , 658 ; knowledge 254 ; Other’s freedom, assimilation of 489–490 , 492 , 495 ; Other’s look 354 , 356 , 364 , 376 , 380 , 381 , 397 , 398 , 400 , 401–402 ; possibilities 68 , 341 , 603–604 ; qualities 265–266 , 267 , 272 , 277 ; reading 444–445 , 447 ; second attitude toward the Other (objectification) 509 , 510 , 516 , 518 , 530 , 541 ; situation 637 , 639 , 645 , 658 , 663 , 714 ; temporality 77 , 164 , 186 , 189 ; world-time 289 , 292 , 299 guilt 108 , 130 , 500 , 540 , 685–686 H Halbwachs, Maurice 165n50 , 668 Hamelin, Octave 45 hatred 233 , 237 , 239 , 243 , 442 , 536 , 540–543 having see possession hearing 425 , 426 Hegel, G.  W.  F.: bad faith 110 , 115 ; being-for-itself, immediate structures of 125 , 127 , 137n22 , 148n28 ; desire destroys its object 751 ; freedom 573 , 577 , 647 , 702 ; knowledge 204n40 ; nothingness 45–49 , 50 , 51 , 53 , 54 , 62 , 73 , 223n46 , 262 , 734 ; “not-I” 248 ; Other’s existence 325–336 , 337–338 , 345 , 347 , 370 , 372 , 385 , 405 , 490 ; arrested synthesis 806 ; temporality 175 , 180 Heidegger, Martin: on anguish 66 ; authenticity 130 , 732 , 733 ; being-in-the-world 34 , 51 , 336–337 , 340 , 622–623 ; circuit of ipseity 161 ; Dasein 14 , 23 , 53 , 89n3 , 122 , 136 , 186 , 281n19 , 337 , 565 , 575 , 691–692 , 693–694 ; death 691–694 , 701n89 , 708–709 , 711n99 ; defining being 2 , 6 , 7 , 12 , 14 , 23 , 24 ; equipmentality 60 , 278 , 280 ; on the future 185 , 208 ; on language 493 ; limits to freedom 630 , 689 ; Mitsein 89 , 337 , 340 , 543n35 , 545 ; nothingness 50–54 , 56 , 60 , 62 , 66 , 82 , 257 ; Other’s existence 336 , 337–344 ; sexual desire 506 ; time 285n20 ; ultimate possibility 602 Heisenberg, Werner 414–415 Hérault de Séchelles, Marie-Jean 503 historicity/historialization: freedom and facticity 678–680 ; History 557 , 651–653 , 705 ; Other’s arising 384 ; psychoanalysis 739 ; reflection 220–221 , 223–227 , 228 , 232 ; sexual attitude 537 ; sexual desire 536 history: death 705 , 707 ; discontinued projects 628 ; essence of man 73 , 82 ; Freudian psychoanalysis 91 , 600 hodological space 380 , 415 , 432 , 434 , 440 holes 793–795 homosexuality 108–110 , 537 human species 562 , 597 , 666–667 , 675 , 676 , 715 , 729 Hume, David 195 , 435 humiliation 227 , 240 , 551 , 617–618 , 621 ; see also shame hunger 139 , 264 , 511 , 512 Husserl, Edmund: Abschattung 4n9 , 456n17 , 736 ; being and essence 2 , 3 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 17 , 19–20 , 21 , 22 , 38 , 576 ; being-for-itself, immediate structures of 121 , 123 , 124 , 135 , 136 , 156 ; categories 270 ; color and form 34 , 263 , 264 , 424 ; intentionality 21 , 62 , 63–64 , 167 , 435 , 442n9 , 509 , 592 ; intuition 246 ; nothingness 34 , 62 , 63–64 ; Other’s existence 106 , 322–325 , 328 , 336 , 337 , 352 , 354 , 370–371 ; phenomenological reduction 6 , 34 , 354 , 371 , 424 , 592 ; temporality 166–167 , 181 , 184n21 , 198 , 210n41 , 217 , 220 , 234n59 , 592 , 609 hyle 19–20 , 21 , 424 , 444 hysteria 620–621 I id 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 idealism: absolute objectivity 414 ; death 690–691 ; for-itself’s relations with in-itself 29 , 808 ; history 707 ; knowledge, primacy of 8 , 13 , 17 , 23 , 25 , 300 , 301 ; nature of the world 414 ; not-itself 248n4 ; Other 311–318 , 319 , 320 , 328–329 , 336 , 337–338 , 343 , 348 ; temporality 166–167 , 208 , 218 ; transcendence 166–167 , 244 identity, principle of 27 , 123 , 127–128 , 195 , 289 , 413–414 illness 233 , 474–475 ; see also pain imagination: aesthetic intuition 268 , 274 ; collective 681 ; Descartes 33 ; existential psychoanalysis 777–778 , 779 ; and perception 355 ; psychological body 452 ; scientific and mathematical entities 101 , 315 ; temporality 165 , 189 , 516 ; theatrical performance 544 ; and unrealizables 685 immediate structures (of the for-itself): facticity 129–136 ; ipseity circuit 158 , 159–162 , 257 ; possibles 136 , 150–159 , 413 ; self-presence 121–129 , 156–157 , 158 , 277–278 ; value 136–149 , 179 , 180 impure reflection 223 , 229 , 230–232 , 234 , 235 , 242 ; see also complicit reflection inauthenticity see authenticity indifference toward the Other 503–505 , 539 indifferents 615 , 736 In Dubious Battle (Steinbeck) 706 inertia 15 , 80 , 105 , 237 , 238 , 280 , 421–422 , 515 , 529 , 717 , 753 , 766 , 788 inferiority complex 587 , 601–602 , 616 , 617–620 , 621 , 626 , 668 , 686 in-itself see being-in-itself in-itself-for-itself: deliverance and salvation 810 ; freedom 737 ; hunger 511 ; internal relations 148n28 ; and making oneself body 598 , 607 ; metaphysical observations 802 ; possession 760 , 768 , 774 , 776 ; quality, existential psychoanalysis of 788 , 789 , 791 , 796 ; retrieval of character 717 ; temporality 480 ; value and the projection of the for-itself 273 , 592 , 735 , 746 , 747 , 811 ; will to power 743 inside-outside duality 1–2 , 4 , 28 instants: in Descartes 136 , 194 , 196–197 , 198 , 199 , 605 , 609 ; new choices 609–611 ; psychological temporality 236 , 237–238 , 242 ; static temporality as multiplicities 194–198 ; temporality, phenomenological description of 163 , 191–192 ; understanding change 214–215 , 291–294 ; world (universal) past 286 , 288 , 290 instruction 78 , 79 , 87 , 349 , 369 , 561 , 634 , 665 , 681–682 instrumentality see equipmentality intentionality: action 569–574 , 584 , 592 , 593 , 623–625 ; in affectivity 442–443 ; and consciousness 10 , 13 ; Husserl 21 , 62 , 63–64 , 167 , 442n9 , 509 , 592 ; lying 89 ; pain 445 ; self-separation 62 ; shame 307 ; structure of 184 ; see also motives internal-external duality 1–2 , 4 , 28 internal negation: being-with 564 ; body 426 , 442 , 446 , 453 , 463 ; defined 249–250 , 251 ; determination as negation 259 , 262–263 ; for-itself–in-itself relationship 261 , 262–263 , 270–271 , 385 , 565 ; freedom as a condition of action 570 , 572 , 573 , 577 , 580–581 , 606 , 611 , 622 , 625 , 628 ; God 320–321 ; hatred 442 , 541 ; and intentional affirmation 301–302 ; lack 137 ; love 485–486 , 497 ; lying 88–89 ; metaphysical observations 800 ; Other’s existence 320–321 , 326 , 328 , 343 , 346–347 , 384–391 , 404–407 , 453 , 481 , 484 , 565 ; potentiality 271 ; qualities 249 , 264 , 268 , 271 ; situation 631 , 634 , 635 , 641 , 642 , 659 , 660 , 689 , 701 , 702 , 712 intuition: absence, perception of 41 , 42 , 44 , 324 ; aesthetic 268 , 274 ; anguish 77 , 80–81 , 84 ; appearance of being 3 , 4 , 7 , 17 , 22–23 ; bad faith 92 , 106 , 113 , 114 ; body 409 , 427 , 459 , 472 , 473 , 475 ; fascination 252 ; knowledge 246 , 253 ; and language 681 , 684–685 ; love 490 , 496 , 497 , 499 ; masochism 500 ; Other’s existence 106 , 310 , 316 , 324 , 325 , 327 , 330 , 346 , 374 , 389 , 799 ; pantheistic 252–253 ; psychoanalysis 92 , 740 , 741 , 744–745 , 782 ; qualities 260 , 263 , 268 ; temporal reflection 217 , 218 , 224 , 230 , 231 , 234 , 235 , 238 ; value 138 , 146 , 149 ; see also sensory knowledge “inverted vision” problem 411 , 412 , 456 ipseity (selfhood): appropriation 771–772 , 776 ; being-for-the-Other 355 , 385 , 388 , 390–391 , 393 , 395 , 398 , 405 , 406 , 455 , 497 ; being-with 551 , 552 , 554–555 , 556 ; and Bergson’s deep-seated self 583 ; essence-freedom relationship 61 , 82–83 , 341 , 583 , 612–613 , 676 , 699 , 735 ; the for-itself in solitude 356 , 357 ; historicity 220–221 , 227 , 228 ; love 497 , 693–694 , 730 ; and the manufactured object 557–558 ; memory 165 ; moral perspectives 809 ; nothingness 52 , 73–74 , 79 ; self-as-facticity see being-in-itself ; self-presence 121–129 , 143 , 156–157 , 158 , 160 , 226 , 277–278 , 329 , 578 , 579 , 594 , 606 , 802 , 803 ; self as transcendence see being-for-itself ; see also circuit of ipseity ; ego ; psyche irascibility 466 , 467 , 622 , 716 irony 88 J James, William 165 , 605n21 Janet, Pierre 620 , 622 , 623 Jaspers, Karl 726 jealousy 233 , 240 Jonah complex 751 , 752 joy 227–228 , 236 , 237 , 247 , 491 , 617 , 622 Joyce, James 598 judgment 37–43 , 62 Judgment Day 699 K Kafka, Franz 363 , 654 , 714–715 Kant, Immanuel: appearance 2 , 15 , 16 , 17 ; apprehension of a straight line by drawing it 198 , 756 ; intelligible character 626–627 ; limitative concepts 56 , 123 ; morality 568 ; negation 34 , 37 , 56 ; Other’s existence 312 , 314 , 317 , 323 , 325 ; “ought implies can” 107 ; temporality 187 , 193 , 195 , 196 , 197–198 , 199–200 , 208 , 209 , 215 Kessel, Joseph 102 keyhole example 355–358 key instrument 433 , 434 Kierkegaard, Søren 66 , 148n28 , 149n29 , 330 , 753 knowledge: ache 474 , 475 ; anguish 85 ; and bad faith 90 , 102 , 103 , 115–116 , 117 ; body 303 ; body-for-the-Other 455 ; character 465 ; food metaphors 264 ; for-itself’s relationship with the in-itself 245 , 246–255 , 301 , 303 , 800 ; idealism 300–301 ; lying 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 ; nothingness 245 , 247 , 248–249 , 251 , 252 , 253 , 254 , 301 , 302 , 303 ; Other’s existence 309 , 311 , 312 , 314 , 320 , 324 , 325 , 328–329 , 330–334 , 335 , 336 ; Other’s look 106 , 366 , 370 , 371 , 375 ; pastified consciousness 206–207 , 590 , 611 ; phenomenon, being of 7 ; point of view 415 ; possession 567 , 749–752 , 772 ; and potentiality 277 ; psychoanalysis 745 ; psychological body 472 ; realism 302 ; reflection 218 , 219 , 224–225 , 226 , 232 , 740 ; renunciation of primacy of 8–16 ; situation 415–416 , 417–421 , 712 ; subject-other 397–398 ; see also questioning ; sensory knowledge Kretschmer, Ernst 466 L laboring community 551–552 , 553 , 557 , 559 , 571–572 , 573–574 , 668 , 689 ; see also class consciousness lack: action 570 , 572 , 649 , 659 ; of being in the for-itself 22 , 112 , 130 , 137–138 , 139 , 142 , 143 , 150 , 186 , 187 , 284–285 , 733 , 734 , 742 ; desire 139–140 , 157 , 733 , 737 , 746 , 759 , 776 ; freedom 634 , 649 , 733 , 736–737 ; historical situation 571 , 678 ; ipseity 160 , 278 ; possibles, being of 150–159 ; potentiality 274 , 275–276 , 284 ; temporality 186 , 187–188 , 190 , 195 , 207 , 211 , 212 ; transcendence 138–139 , 140 , 154 , 278–279 , 282 , 284–285 ; value 144 , 147 , 149 , 273 , 733 , 809 Laclos, Pierre Choderlos de 503 Lalande, Pierre André 345 language 418–419 , 470 , 471 , 472 , 473 , 493–495 , 544 , 546 , 632 , 681 , 684–685 ; see also speech Laplace, Pierre-Simon 185 La Porte Étroite (Gide) 489 Laporte, Jean 34 , 45n8 , 443 Lares deities 762 Lautréamont (Isidore-Lucien Ducasse) 779–780 Leibniz, Gottfried: freedom, theory of 612–613 , 699 ; God 26 , 149 , 320 , 612 , 699 ; possibility 131 , 151 , 152 , 613 ; on temporality 186n25 , 198 , 199 , 208–209 , 613–614 lekton 38 Le Senne, René 45 Lewin, Kurt 415 liberal politics 538 libido 95 , 536 , 600 , 734 , 739 , 741 , 742 , 780 , 781 life 460 , 461 , 462 , 464–465 Light in August (Faulkner) 535 liquidity 779 , 786 , 787 , 790 literary temperament 724–726 , 725 , 731 literature 465–466 the Look: being seen (description of) 106 , 355–366 ; character 716 ; as intermediary between me and myself 308 , 353–355 ; love 489 ; original (fundamental) presence 380–381 ; Other, original relationship to 347–353 ; Other’s arising 366–378 , 552 ; possession 483 ; second attitude toward the Other (objectification) 502 ; sexual desire 518 ; victim’s 534–535 Lot, Ferninand 586 Louis XVIII (of France) 654 love: attitudes toward the Other 485–493 , 494 , 495–499 , 531 , 536 , 537 ; crowd psychology 555–556 ; and destruction 771 ; existential analysis 730 ; individualization of 693–694 ; psychological temporality 233 , 234–236 , 239 , 240–241 , 243 ; purity of feeling 605 ; subordinate projects 626 luxury 749 , 764 lying 88–93 , 113 M Maine de Biran, Marie-François-Pierre 435 making 747–749 , 764–765 , 766 Malebranche, Nicolas 343 Mallarmé, Stéphane 99n11 , 174n17 Malraux, André 170 , 174 , 373 , 568 , 691 , 701–702 , 709 Man, Hendrick de 668 manufactured objects 557–558 , 561–562 marriage 761 , 762 Marx, Karl 668 , 753 masochism 499–501 , 524 , 532 , 617 master see slavery material imagination 778 , 779 Mauriac, François 99 , 642 , 702 Mauss, Marcel 534n27 , 786n51 Medusa myth 565 Megarian philosophy 122 melting 196 , 197 , 252 , 755 , 756 , 778–779 , 788 memory 164–165 , 170 , 179 , 199–200 , 204 , 590 , 649 , 703 , 707 , 762 me-object: being-for-the-Other, structures of 387 , 388–389 , 390 , 391 , 392 , 393 , 394 , 401 , 402 , 481 ; being-seen-by-the-Other (The Look) 352 , 353 , 358 , 364 , 365 , 368–377 , 380 , 382 ; body-as-being-for-itself 427 , 438 ; body-for-the-Other 453 , 455 ; Hegel’s theory of the Other 325 , 333 , 372 ; Idealism 316 , 319 ; inferiority complex 617 ; language 495 ; limiting my freedom 682 ; love 485–498 ; masochism 499–500 ; my death 707 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 468–469 , 472 , 475 ; and seriousness 753 ; shame 308 , 358 , 359–362 , 364 , 365 , 367 , 371 , 392 , 393 , 394 , 499–500 Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 622n31 metaphysical theory of being in general 480 , 565 , 798–808 metro journey example 558 Meyerson, Émile 201 , 290 , 695 Mitsein 89 , 90 , 93 , 110 , 337 , 341 , 543–566 modesty 392 money 765 Montassut, Marcel 726n4 moralistes 71 , 503 , 514n14 , 605 morality 489 , 568 , 754 , 809–811 Morgan, Charles Langbridge 690n75 motives: equipmentality 279–280 , 587–588 ; for-itself’s structures 135 , 572 , 574 , 577 , 588–589 ; freedom’s situation 636 , 657 , 659 ; for the objectification of the Other 390–395 ; passions 579–582 , 583 , 584 , 586–587 ; and reasons in a theory of action 570–575 , 585–593 , 604 , 608 , 615 , 618 , 621 ; sexual desire 516–522 ; temporality 64–65 , 71–73 , 178 , 240 , 516 , 573 , 589–591 ; see also causality movement: as an act 622 , 623 ; body-for-the-Other 460 , 461 , 463–464 ; desire 514 ; gliding 757–758 , 786 , 789 ; as in-itself’s foundation 803 ; my place 641 ; world-time 292–294 , 464 N nationality 440 , 664 , 667 , 668 , 676 nausea 452–453 , 457–458 , 459 , 475 , 796 necessity: being-in-itself, characteristics of 28 ; body-for-itself 417 , 426 , 433 , 434 , 437–438 , 439 , 440 ; body-for-the-Other 458 ; historical narratives 652 negation: being-for-itself, immediate structures of 127–128 , 137–138 , 141 , 154 , 158 , 577 ; being-for-the-Other 106 , 316 , 319–321 , 350 , 368 , 372 , 384–391 , 404–407 , 453 , 480–481 , 484 , 565 , 806 ; being-in-the-world 38 , 60 ; being-with 564 ; body 413 , 426 , 442 , 446 , 453 , 463 ; desire 734 ; determination as negation 255–263 , 267–268 , 271 , 426 ; empty intentions 64 ; equipmentality 60 , 278 , 282–285 , 302 , 413 ; freedom as a condition of action 570 , 572 , 573 , 577 , 580–581 , 606 , 611 , 622 , 625 , 628 ; hatred 442 , 541 ; irony 88 ; judgment 37–43 , 62 ; knowledge 247–255 , 301 ; lack 137–138 ; love 485–486 , 497 ; lying 88–89 ; masochism 499 ; metaphysical observations 799 , 800 , 806 , 807 ; and nothingness 37–44 , 46–50 , 53–57 , 65 , 73 , 86 ; pain 446 ; potentialities 270–277 ; qualities 264 , 265 , 266–267 , 272 ; quantity 268–269 , 302 ; questioning 35–37 , 57 , 59–60 , 65 , 86 , 244 ; self-negation see bad faith ; situation 631 , 634 , 635 , 641 , 642 , 659 , 660 , 689 , 701 , 702 , 712 ; temporality 167 , 177 , 181 , 183–184 , 205–206 , 216 , 224 , 231 , 238 , 302 ; theories of the Other 322 , 326 , 328 , 332 , 333 , 340 , 343 , 346–347 ; veto/prohibition 87–88 ; world (universal) time 285 , 286 , 288 , 290 , 298 , 299 negatities 56 , 57 , 60 , 64 , 86 , 87 , 570 , 572 , 574 ; see also judgment ; questioning Nietzsche, Friedrich 2 , 189n28 , 702 , 741n15 nihilation: absence 41–42 , 62–64 , 256 ; anguish 66 , 68 , 70 , 73 , 74 , 76 , 79 , 81 , 84 , 85 , 135 ; attitudes toward the Other 480 , 488 , 501 , 516 , 519 , 520 , 530 , 541 , 565 ; bad faith 85 , 87–88 , 112–113 , 231 ; being-for-the-Other 386 , 404 , 405 , 706 ; being-in-the-world 201 , 603 ; body 416 , 417 , 438 , 439 , 442 , 446 , 447 , 459 , 463 , 465 , 469 , 470 ; choice 608 , 609 , 610–611 ; death 701–702 , 706 ; facticity as an immediate structure of the for-itself 129 , 131 , 132–133 , 134 , 135 ; for-itself’s lack of being 137 , 150 ; freedom 86 , 135 , 573 , 577–581 , 583 , 593 , 599 , 610–611 , 624–625 , 628 , 736 ; fundamental project 734–735 ; ipseity 160 ; metaphysical observations 799 , 801 , 802 , 803 , 804 , 805 ; motives and reasons 572 , 574 , 575 , 588 ; my place 641 , 642 , 644 , 646 ; and the origins of nothingness 53 , 58–59 , 131 , 662 , 734 ; pain 336 ; possibilities 150 , 155 , 156 ; prereflective cogito 73 ; questioning as 59–60 , 62 ; reflection 149 , 160 , 221 , 403 , 404 , 405 ; situation 635 , 636 , 641 , 642 , 645 , 646 , 648 , 659 , 662 , 663 ; temporality 62–64 , 65 , 73 , 101 , 176 , 189 , 201–207 , 208 , 212 , 213 , 216 , 235 ; value, being of 137 , 140 , 141 , 145 , 147 , 149 “no” 87–88 noema 8 , 9 , 22 , 27 , 34 , 38 , 198 , 324 , 749 noesis 9 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 27 nominalism 3 non-being see nothingness non-positional consciousness: being-with 548 , 562 ; of the body 442 , 452 , 457 , 595 ; counting 11–12 ; desire 510 ; motives 591 ; new choice 611 ; original choice 604 ; possibilities 159 , 161 ; potentiality 271 ; shame 307 ; spatiality 254 ; temporality 229 , 231 ; see also non-thetic consciousness non-thetic consciousness: action 576 , 589 , 606 , 607 , 618 , 624 , 632 , 740 ; being-with 544 , 545 , 550 , 561 ; body-for-itself 442 , 444 , 446 ; body-for-the-Other 455 , 458 , 461 , 465 ; circuit of ipseity 161 , 280 , 355 , 771–772 ; of counting 11–12 ; desire 513 ; equipmentality 280 , 282 , 285 ; fascination 252 , 492 ; hunger 511 ; knowledge 13 , 116 , 245 , 253 ; masochism 500 ; my body as known by the Other 469 , 472 , 475 ; Other’s look 355 , 360 , 385 ; possibilities 159 , 161 , 233 , 355 , 360 , 624 ; potentiality 271 ; temporality 188 , 189 , 217 , 218 , 226 , 234 ; value 143 , 148–149 , 231 ; see also non-positional consciousness nothingness: action, condition of freedom 570 , 577 , 578–579 , 585 , 588 , 591 , 594 , 599 , 609–611 , 623 , 624–625 ; anguish as apprehension of 51 , 66 , 68 , 69–74 , 76 , 77 , 79 , 81 , 82 , 85 ; bad faith 86 , 88 , 104 , 107 , 112 ; body 416 , 427 , 438 , 442 ; consciousness of 15 , 87 ; desire 734 ; determination as negation 257 , 258 , 259 , 260 , 261 , 262 , 267 , 268 ; dialectical conception of 44–50 ; equipmentality 282 ; facticity as an immediate structure of the for-itself 131 , 135 ; freedom 61 , 65 , 663 ; ipseity 161 ; knowledge 245 , 247 , 248–249 , 251 , 252 , 253 , 254 , 301 , 302 , 303 ; love 492 , 493 , 497 ; melting snow 755 ; metaphysical observations 799 , 800 , 801 , 803–804 , 807 ; and negation 36–44 , 46–50 , 53–57 , 65 , 73 , 86 ; non-being and the transphenomenal phenomenon 21–22 ; Other’s existence 318 , 319 , 357 , 359 , 365 , 373 , 374 , 377 , 385–386 , 404–407 , 807 ; phenomenological conception of 50–57 ; possession 764 , 767 , 769 , 771 , 775 , 776 ; possibles 68 , 153 , 156 , 157 , 158–159 ; potentiality 273 , 276–277 ; primacy of being 44–50 , 58–59 , 60 , 801 ; quality 264 , 265 , 267 , 268 , 782 , 785 , 791 , 793 ; quantity 269 , 270 ; in questioning 36 , 57 , 59–60 , 62 , 65 , 72 , 244 ; reasons and motives 573 , 574 , 581 , 585 ; self-presence 123 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 158 ; situation 571 , 633 , 634 , 640 , 643 , 654 , 659 , 662 , 663 , 678 , 685 , 690 ; temporality, ontology of 194 , 196 , 201 , 202 , 205–206 , 208 , 210 , 212 , 213 , 214–215 , 216 ; temporality, phenomenology of 163 , 164 , 176–177 , 181 , 183–184 , 187 , 188 , 190 , 191 ; temporality, psychological 64 , 219 , 220 , 221 , 222 , 223n91 , 227 , 230 , 231 , 237 ; value 137 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 145 , 148 ; world (universal time) 286 , 288 , 289 , 290 , 291 , 292 , 295 , 296 , 298 , 299 , 300 ; see also lack noumenon 5 , 209 , 313 , 318 , 348 nows see instants O objecthood: being-for-the-Other, structures of 387 , 390–402 ; being-seen-by-the-Other (The Look) 347–353 , 357 , 358 , 365 , 366–377 , 380 , 382 , 383 ; criticism 110 ; guilt 540 ; Hegel’s theory of the Other 325 , 326 , 327 , 328–329 , 331 , 332–333 , 334 , 335 , 372 ; Heidegger’s theory of the Other 338 ; Husserl’s theory of the Other 322–323 , 324 ; Idealism 312 , 315 , 316 , 319 ; language 493 , 495 ; love 485–499 ; masochism 499–500 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 468–478 ; self’s body for itself 476–478 ; shame 308 , 358 , 359–362 , 364 , 365 , 367 , 371–372 , 392 , 393 , 394 , 499–500 ; situation 677 , 680 , 684 ; them-object 364 , 383 , 548 , 551 , 555 ; “we”-object 546–557 , 563 , 564 ; see also second attitude toward the Other (objectification) obscenity 527–530 , 794 , 795 obsession 620 Oedipus complex 92 , 213 , 600 , 768 ontological disappointment 158 , 190 , 273 , 433 , 497–498 , 802 , 805–806 ontological optimism 334–336 opportunity 721–722 oppression see class consciousness orgasm 517–518 , 523–524 , 534 orientation 224 , 349 , 413–414 , 425 , 427 , 434 original place 639–640 original presence 256 , 257 , 352 , 378 , 380 original project: anguish 79 ; body 436 , 437 , 438–439 ; deliberation 604–605 ; existential vs.  empirical psychoanalysis 737–746 ; fatigue example 594–599 , 601 , 604 , 607 , 614 , 615 ; love 491 ; modification 595 , 607–609 , 610–611 , 627 ; nothingness 129 ; and order of interpretation 612–616 ; Other’s existence 504 , 536–537 ; possession 606 , 767–768 , 769 , 771 , 774 , 785 ; as project of being 606 , 731–737 , 742 , 746–747 , 774–776 ; psychology’s interpretation of 723–731 ; and reflective consciousness 606–607 , 616–622 ; revelation through qualities 777–797 ; sexual attitudes 536–537 ; temporality 605–606 , 609–611 , 627 original sin 392 , 540 , 612–613 Other: conditions for a valid theory of 344–347 ; equipmentality 281 , 395 , 396–397 , 398 , 399 , 400 , 431 ; fundamental relation to Me (reciprocal negation) 383–390 ; generosity 771 ; God as an explanation 320–321 ; Hegel’s theory of 325–336 , 337 , 345 , 347 , 370 , 385 , 405 ; Heidegger’s theory of 336 , 337–344 ; Husserl’s theory of 322–325 , 328 , 336 , 337 , 352 , 370 ; idealism 311–318 , 319 , 320 , 328–329 , 336 , 337–338 , 343 , 348 ; my surroundings 657 ; Plato’s Sophist 799 ; plurality 382–383 ; presence and absence 378–382 , 386 ; psychoanalyst’s role 92 ; question of 307–309 ; realist explanation 309–311 , 319 , 320 ; relationship to dead life 703–704 ; sensation in 420 , 422 , 423 , 424 ; simultaneity 364–365 ; as situation 663–689 ; as a tool-machine 430 , 431 , 454 , 456 , 503 , 504 ; understanding see existential psychoanalysis ; see also attitudes toward the Other ; being-for-the-Other ; being-with ; body ; the Look ; other-object other-object: being-for-the-Other, structures of 387 , 388 , 390–391 , 392 , 393 , 394–400 , 401 , 402 ; being-seen-by-the-Other (The Look) 347–353 , 357 , 358 , 366–367 , 371 , 382 , 383 ; God 393–394 , 408 ; guilt 540 ; Idealism 312 , 315 , 316 , 319 ; love 484 , 485 , 486 , 496 , 497 , 498 , 499 ; my defense of being 367 , 390–395 , 401 ; my existence as a body known by the Other 471–472 ; situation 479 , 677 , 680 , 684 ; see also second attitude toward the Other (objectification) outside-inside duality 1–2 , 4 , 28 Footnotes Translator’s Introduction 1 I will use EN only when the reference is necessarily to the French version of the text.  2 Sartre’s account of the imagination has also earned him a place within “analytical” aesthetics.  See for example Hopkins (1998).  Another, much bigger collection of papers appeared in the US a decade later: Schilpp (1981).  3 Isaiah Berlin, another influential figure in British philosophy at the time, was aware of Sartre’s philosophy, although he never engaged with it in detail.  (As Berlin was also centrally concerned with freedom, this was perhaps a missed opportunity.) In a letter written in 1955, Berlin reports: “I have been reading, of all people, the detestable Sartre.  The novels are too slimy & dark, but he is a very clever man & his moral philosophy is what I think I 3/4 believe.  What a fool I was to be deceived by Freddie’s articles in Horizon at the end of the war which concentrated on Sartre’s obscure logic & his attitudes to sex & “proved” it all bogus.  It is not.  It is most imaginative and bold and important” (Berlin 2009: 467).  4 By “traditional theories of mind” Hampshire is referring to post-Cartesian conceptions.  Sartre’s relationship to Descartes is too complicated to discuss here.  5 Describing the reception of Sartre in the US, Ann Fulton suggests that a perceived affinity with empiricism—although in this case it was with William James’s philosophy rather than Hume’s—also helped to “legitimize” Sartre’s philosophy there (Fulton 1999: 3).  6 Sartre’s early paper about Husserl is available in translation as Sartre (1970).  For a readable account of Husserl’s phenomenology and its relation to Sartre’s concerns, see Bakewell (2016).  7 The exceptions are interesting, however.  Wilfrid Desan, who was born in Belgium and studied in Lille, was a native French speaker who apparently met Sartre during the Second World War.  He moved to the US in 1948, gained a doctorate there, and spent his working life as a university professor of philosophy.  His first book, published in 1954, was a critical study of EN and relied on the French text (Desan 1954).  Marjorie Grene, an American who had spent time studying in Germany with Heidegger and Jaspers in the early 1930s, published various books and papers about existentialism.  The Canadian-born Robert Denoon Cumming served as a US soldier in France in the Second World War and spent time as a student at the Sorbonne.  Although his own work on Sartre (Cumming 1991–2001) was only published later, he introduced generations of students to contemporary European thought in his classes at Columbia University.  Herbert Marcuse, who emigrated from Germany in 1932, was already developing his new interpretation of Marxism when he published his unfavorable review of EN (Marcuse 1947).  8 Beauvoir also had an international name by now as a controversial French intellectual.  She visited America separately in 1947 and published her own ambivalent observations in France a year later (translated as Beauvoir 1999).  9 The Notebooks ’ many references to the desirability of a social revolution suggest that at least part of Sartre’s reason for abandoning his work on morality was that political imperatives had come to seem more fundamental.  10 Barnes (1965: viii–ix).  11 The exceptions include the following: Aquila (1998), Baiasu (2011), Baldwin (1979), and Gardner (2005, 2009).  More of this type of work has been published in France and Germany, where philosophy tends to be studied from a more historical perspective.  See for example Hartmann (1966) and Simont (1998).  12 Various reasons may explain this neglect: in particular, I think Heidegger’s writing style was a deterrent.  It is difficult to imagine Ayer, Murdoch, Hampshire, or Berlin enjoying his dense and humorless prose.  13 Of course, Sartre also disagrees with Heidegger on many topics, including the significance of human death and the nature of our relations with others.  14 See Baldwin (2007) for further discussion of this debate.  15 See Gutting (2001) for a helpful overview of many of these figures.  16 Foucault’s eloquent concluding paragraphs to The Order of Things are often quoted to the same effect.  Foucault states that “man is an invention of recent date” and that, if “the fundamental arrangements of knowledge” were to crumble, “man would be erased, like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea” (Foucault 1970: 387).  17 See, for example, Caws (1992).  18 Le Castor , which is French for “beaver,” was Sartre’s nickname for Beauvoir.  See Daigle and Golomb (2008) for the question of Beauvoir’s influence.  19 Sartre’s French term is visqueux , which (as I argue below) should be translated as “viscous” rather than “slimy.” 20 Feminists have also found other elements in BN useful, e.g., its account of the objectifying effect of the Other’s gaze.  For a collection of feminist interpretations of Sartre, see Murphy (1999).  21 Derrida continued to publish until his death in 2014, but the “classical” deconstructive texts appeared in the late 1960s and 1970s.  22 Heidegger’s attack in particular can be seen to be limited by its reliance on EH rather than BN.  23 For fuller discussion, see Farrell Fox (2003) and Howells (1992b).  Introduction: In Search of Being 1 Translator’s note (TN): Sartre’s Introduction is entitled “A la recherche de l’être.” I have been guided in my translation by the thought that Sartre probably intended to echo Proust’s A la Recherche du Temps Perdu .  Note that Proust is used as an example within BN’s opening pages.  2 TN: Sartre is loosely quoting from a French translation of Nietzsche’s Thus Spake Zarathustra .  The French arrière-mondes is used to translate Nietzsche’s German neologism Hinterwelten , which is often translated into English as “backworld.” The idea is that of a world “beyond” or “behind” the world we experience.  3 TN: Kant’s term Erscheinung is normally translated into English as “appearance.” 4 TN: Sartre is referring to the distinction between energeia and dunamis in Aristotle’s metaphysics.  Both terms are variously translated in different English translations: I use “actuality” and “potentiality” for Sartre’s acte and puissance .  5 TN: The ancient Greek term hexis is important in Aristotle’s philosophy.  Although it is agreed to be difficult to translate Aristotle’s exact meaning, “habit” and “disposition” are both commonly used.  6 TN: Sartre uses the French word vertu here in its older sense, to mean a power or active principle—as it is used in English philosophy in the well-known example of “dormitive virtue.” 7 TN: Pierre Duhem (1861–1916) was a French physicist and philosopher of science.  Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) was a French mathematician, physicist, and philosopher of science.  8 TN: Husserl’s English translators usually render Wesenschau as “intuition of essences.” 9 TN: The term Abschattung refers in Husserl’s phenomenology to the incomplete aspect of an object given in our perception of it—for example, to the one side of a six-sided die that we may be able to see.  Kersten translates it as “adumbration” (Husserl 1983); it is sometimes translated as “profile.” 10 TN: Sartre probably has Being and Time in mind here (Heidegger 1980).  11 TN: See my note on the phenomenological reduction in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  12 TN: Husserl says this in §98 of Ideas (Husserl 1983).  Berkeley’s formula Esse est percipi means “To be is to be perceived.” Percipere —in this section’s title—is the infinitive form of “to perceive” in Latin.  For the terms noema , noesis , and irreal , see the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  13 Sartre’s note: It goes without saying that any attempt to replace the percipere by some other attitude of human-reality will be equally fruitless.  If you allow that being is revealed to man in his “doing,” you still need to establish the being of the doing, apart from the action.  14 TN: Husserl makes this point in many of his writings.  See for example Husserl (1960: 72).  15 TN: Spinoza advances this view of self-consciousness in Part Two of his Ethics (Spinoza 1985).  16 TN:… une conscience non-thétique… See note on thèse in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  17 TN:… comme “révélante-révelée”… I have not been able to find this exact phrase in Heidegger; Sartre probably took it from Corbin’s preface to his translations.  Here Corbin says that the mode of being of human-reality is: “ d’être révélante et en même temps réalite-révelée ,” using these phrases to translate Heidegger’s erschliessend and Erschlossenheit (Heidegger 1938: 15).  18 TN: See my note on conscience (de) soi in Notes on the Translation.  19 TN: The term Erlebnis comes from Husserl, who uses it to mean “experience” in a broad sense.  In deference to this broad sense, Kersten translates it as “mental process” (Husserl 1983).  French translators, picking up the sense of Leben (to live), sometimes render it as le vécu .  20 TN: Sartre is quoting from Being and Time (Heidegger 1980), §9.  21 TN: See my note on Husserl’s “factual necessity” in Notes on the Translation.  22 TN:… qu’elle se “tire du néant.” This phrase is often used in French to refer to the act of creation (as in God’s creation of the world “out of nothing,” for example).  23 TN:… “néant de conscience”… I am not sure why Sartre puts this phrase within quotation marks.  Although it is tempting to translate it as “the non-being of consciousness” because that sounds better in English, I stick to “nothingness” for consistency.  24 Sartre’s note: This does not at all imply that consciousness is the foundation of its being.  On the contrary, as we will see later, the being of consciousness is fully contingent.  We wish to point out merely that: 1.  nothing is the cause of consciousness; 2.  consciousness is the cause of its own way of being.  25 TN: This Latin phrase means “from the world’s contingency”; it often figures in a so-called “proof” of God’s existence.  The idea is that the contingent world requires a ground in necessity.  26 TN:… une activité synthétique de liaison.  Here I translate liaison as “combination” (which is normally used to translate Kant’s Verbindung into English), as it is likely Sartre takes this phrase from Kant.  27 TN:… je m’affecte moi-même de l’existence.  See my note on s’affecter in Notes on the Translation.  28 Sartre’s note: It is for this reason that the Cartesian doctrine of substance reaches its logical conclusion in Spinoza’s thought.  29 TN: For hyle , see the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  30 TN: As impressionel is not an ordinary French word, I translate it with a parallel (made-up) adjective, “impressional.” 31 TN:… trouver leur remplissement… See my note on remplir in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  32 TN: Les intentions… objectivantes… See my note on objectiver in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  33 TN:… la conscience naît portée sur un être… No English verb has the combination of meanings of portée sur in this sentence.  Although “directed upon” is the primary meaning, the verb porter also means “to carry”; perhaps Sartre’s italics are to suggest the idea that consciousness is “carried” by its object.  34 TN: Heidegger characterizes Dasein like this in §4 of Being and Time (Heidegger 1980).  35 TN: Selbstständigkeit is German for “independence.” The philosophical use of this term that Sartre has in mind here is the idea of something’s being capable of existing on its own, self-sufficiently.  36 TN: In this passage Sartre uses the same French word— soi —to mean “itself” (as in being-for-itself) and “self” (as in consciousness (of) self).  The basic point being made is that we should not be misled by the term “itself” into thinking that being-in-itself relates to itself.  See my note on soi in Notes on the Translation.  Sartre discusses the misleading aspect of the term “itself” as it appears in the compound “in-itself” at EN 112.  Part One: The Problem of Nothingness Chapter 1: The Origin of Negation 1 TN: Sartre’s section heading is “ L’interrogation ,” but as “interrogation” in English suggests a formal activity (e.g., by the police), I translate it here as “Questioning.” In this section, Sartre closely follows Heidegger’s methodology in Being and Time (see especially Heidegger 1980: §2); as the term “question” (as substantive and as verb) centrally figures in English translations of Heidegger, this adds to the advantage of my choice.  Elsewhere, I occasionally use “to interrogate,” especially when interroger figures as a verb in the text.  2 TN: Jean Laporte (1886–1948) was a French philosopher and historian of philosophy.  3 TN: The lekton in Stoic philosophy is the intelligible content of a thought.  The concept roughly corresponds to the concept of a “proposition” in contemporary philosophy of language.  4 TN: For the figure/ground opposition, see my note on Gestalt psychology in Notes on the Translation.  5 TN: Bergson gives his reductive argument against the idea of non-being—opposed here by Sartre—in Bergson (1911a).  6 TN: Here and in the following sentence I use the published English translation of the French excerpt from Hegel; both are from Hegel (1991: §24).  7 Sartre’s note: Introduction to the Lesser Logic , §XXIV, cited by Lefebvre, Morceaux Choisis .  TN: The Lefebvre anthology is available in French as Hegel (1995).  8 Sartre’s note: Laporte, Le Problème de l’Abstraction , p.  25 (Presses Universitaires, 1940).  TN: The book by Laporte on which Sartre draws here has not been translated into English.  9 Sartre also takes this sentence from the Laporte text just cited on p.  24.  The French philosopher René Le Senne (1882–1954) was a professor at the Sorbonne.  Le Senne was influenced by the “dialectical idealism” of an earlier French philosopher, Octave Hamelin (1856–1907), also mentioned in this sentence.  10 Sartre’s note: Esquisse de la Logique , written by Hegel between 1808 and 1811, was the basis for his lessons in the Nuremberg Gymnasium.  TN: Sartre found the text mentioned in this note in the Lefebvre anthology.  The text was not published during Hegel’s lifetime, but it is now available in English translation as “Logic (for the Middle Class)” (in Hegel 1986).  I have used that translation; the passage Sartre quotes is on p.  76.  11 TN: I have quoted the corresponding English passage from Hegel (1991: §86).  12 TN: I have quoted the corresponding English passage from Hegel (1991: §87).  13 Sartre’s note: Hegel, Petite Logique , E §88.  TN: I quote the corresponding English passage from Hegel (1991: §87).  14 Sartre’s note: Hegel, Grande Logique , chap.  1.  TN: I quote the corresponding English passage from Hegel (2010: 61).  15 TN: Sartre found this in the Lefebvre anthology; it comes from the Esquisse de la Logique , §6.  The corresponding English translation (slightly modified here) is at Hegel (1986: 76).  16 TN: I quote the corresponding English passage from Hegel (2010: 10).  17 TN: The Latin phrase means “every determination is negation.” In fact this phrase does not appear in Spinoza’s published writings but in a 1674 letter to Jarig Jelles.  Arguably, the doctrine is implicit in Spinoza’s Ethics .  18 TN: Sartre is quoting from Hegel’s Science of Logic .  I quote the corresponding English passage from Hegel (2010: 59).  19 Sartre’s note: Petite Logique , 2nd edn, E §87.  TN: I quote the corresponding English passage from Hegel (1991: §87).  20 Sartre’s note: What makes this even stranger is that Hegel is the first to have noticed that “every negation is a determinate negation”—or, in other words, that it bears on a content.  21 TN: Sartre’s examples of everyday locutions here cannot be translated in a way that both preserves Sartre’s point and uses everyday English.  I have slightly altered the examples where necessary in order to preserve Sartre’s intended emphasis on the multiplicity of instances in which we talk about “nothing.” 22 TN: Although this famous phrase is widely attributed to Plato’s Socrates, it does not actually occur verbatim anywhere in Plato’s works.  23 Sartre’s note: Heidegger, Qu’est-ce que la Métaphysique? (trans.  Corbin, NRF, 1938).  TN: Heidegger (1938a), available in English translation as Heidegger (1978c).  24 TN:… une “compréhension” du néant… I follow Heidegger’s translators in using the word “understanding” rather than “comprehension.” For the same reason I translate entendement in the previous sentence as “intellect,” as Krell does in his translation of Heidegger (1978c).  25 TN:… l’homme se fait annoncer … ce qu’il est.  Sartre uses this phrase frequently in the text, and borrows it from Corbin’s translations of Heidegger (see Heidegger 1938b: 88).  The basic idea here is that man makes sense of himself in terms of the world around him.  As Sartre might put it, the world reflects back to man his “projects.” 26 TN:… condition de la surrection… du monde… The relatively rare French term surrection is geological, referring to an upheaval or “uplift” of land.  See my note on Sartre’s many metaphors of upward movement in Notes on the Translation.  27 TN:… l’homme est un “être des lointains.” Sartre is quoting from the final paragraph of Heidegger’s Vom Wesen des Grundes (translated into English as Heidegger 1969), which had been published in French more than once in the 1930s.  Corbin’s translation has it in the singular: un être du lointain .  28 TN: Sartre is almost certainly alluding to Heidegger.  Corbin, for example, translates Heidegger as saying “ Dans l’angoisse, nous ‘flottons en suspens .’ ” 29 Sartre’s note: In Hegel’s parlance, “immediate alterity.” 30 TN:… c’est Hegel qui… déclare que l’Esprit est le négatif.  Hegel says that “spirit… is the negative” in the Preface to the first edition of the Science of Logic (Hegel 2010: 10).  31 TN:… un certain type de réalités… Sartre’s plural form (literally “realities”) sounds odd in English; for clarity I have inserted the word “particulars.” Sartre is referring here to negatities.  32 TN: The French adjective déséloignant is a neologism used to translate Heidegger’s complicated term ent-fernend .  Here I follow Joan Stambaugh’s practice in her translation of Being and Time (Heidegger 2010) and use “de-distancing.” 33 TN:… pour “qu’il y ait”… The quotation marks signal that Sartre has in mind Heidegger’s phrase es gibt , for which the French il y a is a good equivalent.  See my note on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  34 TN: The term négatité is Sartre’s neologism.  See my note in Notes on the Translation.  35 TN:… le néant “est été”… See my note on this ungrammatical phrase in Notes on the Translation.  36 TN: Although the French text has négatité here, it seems likely that Sartre meant to write “negativity”; the latter is something that can come in “measures,” whereas negatities are particulars.  37 TN:… ces rapports d’ustensilité… See my note on “equipmentality” in the section on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  38 Sartre’s note: Cf.  Part Four, Chapter 1.  39 TN: The French psychologist Hippolyte Taine (1828–1893) claimed that external perception was a “true hallucination.” 40 Sartre’s note: L’Imagination (Alcan, 1936).  TN: Translated as Sartre (2012).  41 Sartre’s note: See Introduction, section III.  42 Sartre’s note: J.  Wahl, Études Kierkegaardiennes : Kierkegaard et Heidegger.  TN: Sartre has misquoted the name of Wahl’s essay; it was actually “Heidegger et Kierkegaard,” first published in a French journal in 1932, then in a 1938 collection of Wahl’s essays, Études Kierkegaardiennes .  I have not been able to find it in English translation.  The philosopher Jean Wahl (1888–1974) was teaching in Paris at the time Sartre wrote BN.  43 TN: Ces conduites sont mes possibilités… I translate conduites as “strategies” here, as it fits the sense well.  See my note in Notes on the Translation.  44 Sartre’s note: We will return to the subject of possibles in Part Two of this work.  TN: Sartre is playing with Berkeley’s phrase “to be is to be perceived.” 45 TN: Here as elsewhere (see EN 49), Sartre uses an established logical distinction between “contradictory” and “contrary.” As Sartre is drawing on a semi-technical distinction, I retain it.  46 TN:… il deviendrait… à-venir.  Sartre puns here by using the phrase à-venir (“to come”), a homophone with avenir (“future”).  I have tried to match the pun by using the word “forth-coming.” This pun appears again several times in the text; Sartre is imitating Heidegger’s structurally similar pun Zu-kunft .  47 TN:… ma conduite antérieure… I have corrected what I assume to be a mistake in the French text—as “my earlier behavior” makes no sense here.  48 TN: I leave moralistes in French, as Sartre is referring to the group of French thinkers known by that term, which includes Pascal, La Bruyère, and La Rochefoucauld.  49 TN:… peser des motifs et des mobiles… See the note on motifs and mobiles in the section on vocabulary relating to the mind in Notes on the Translation.  50 TN: This phrase translates into English, as Sartre tells us in the next sentence, as “Essence is what has been.” 51 TN: Here Sartre is probably referring to the Quietist orientation within Christianity, influential in seventeenth-century France, according to which man’s perfection consists in his self-annihilation and a withdrawal of his mind from worldly interests in order to contemplate God.  52 TN:… font lever des valeurs comme des perdrix… Sartre’s metaphor—which I have slightly changed in the English—comes from shooting: the idea is that values spring up, like partridges flying up out of trees when the hunter fires his gun.  53 TN: The terminology Sartre has in mind here is Heidegger’s expression das Man , of which the French equivalent would be l’on (in literal English, “one”).  See my note in the section on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  54 TN: Sartre’s use of le Moi , in conjunction with the argument here, makes it clear that his target is Bergson.  To match English translations of Bergson, I translate Moi here as “Self” rather than “Me” or “Ego.” 55 Sartre’s note: See Part Three, Chapter 1.  56 TN: See Bergson (1960) for his account of the “deep-seated self” ( le Moi profond ) and its relation to freedom.  57 TN:… la personne d’autrui.  “Person” is used here in its philosophical sense (implying psychological properties, agency, etc.).  The translation sounds slightly odd: “personhood” sounds better but is less accurate.  58 TN: Sartre’s expression la véritable “donnée immediate” de notre liberté alludes to the title of Bergson’s influential work Les Données Immédiates de la Conscience (translated as Bergson 1960).  59 TN: See my note on ek-stase in Notes on the Translation.  Chapter 2: Bad Faith 1 TN: Sartre here repeats verbatim his sentence from EN 29.  2 TN: Max Scheler (1874–1928) was a German phenomenologist.  His famous essay on resentment is translated into English as Scheler (2003).  3 TN: Heidegger uses the German term Mitsein (which translators render as “Being-with”) to refer to the sociality of Dasein ’s existence.  4 TN: Although Sartre uses the French terms ça and moi , I have followed the convention in English of using the Latin words to translate Freud’s terms for these parts of the mind.  5 TN: The German word Trieb , which features in Freud’s writings, is translated as “drive.” 6 TN: On a… “chosifié” la mauvaise foi… See my note on chosifier in Notes on the Translation.  Here Sartre’s scare quotes have led me to follow his emphasis on the novelty of the verb by using “thingify.” 7 Sartre’s note: NRF (1937).  TN: Wilhelm Stekel (1868–1940) was an Austrian doctor and psychologist.  Initially a follower of Freud, he came later to disagree with several aspects of Freud’s theory.  The English translation of the book quoted by Sartre is Stekel (1953).  8 TN: The French section heading is “Les conduites de mauvaise foi,” but as I am avoiding the plural “behaviors,” I have settled here for “forms.” 9 TN: Jacques Chardonne (1884–1968) was a French novelist.  The novel by him to which Sartre refers— L’Amour, C’est Beaucoup Plus que l’Amour —was published in 1937; no English translation exists.  10 TN: Jean Sarment (1897–1976) was a French actor and writer.  The play by him to which Sartre refers— Je Suis Trop Grand pour Moi —was written in 1924; no English translation exists.  11 TN:… “Tel qu’en lui-même enfin l’éternité le change.” Sartre is quoting the first line of a famous poem—“The Tomb of Edgar Poe”—by the French poet Stéphane Mallarmé (1842–1898).  I have quoted the line from the English translation of this poem by Peter Manson.  12 TN: Sartre is referring to the characters in Beaumarchais’s 1778 play The Marriage of Figaro .  13 TN: For this distinction between ways of being in the world, see the section on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  14 TN: Sartre alludes here to Les Coeurs Purs (translated into English as The Pure in Heart ), a collection of three stories published in 1928 by the French author Joseph Kessel.  15 TN: The term “adequation” is less common in English philosophical writing than adéquation is in French, but I use it because Sartre’s phrase is far from everyday French.  Aquinas defines truth as adaequatio intellectus et rei , which means the “adequation of the intellect and thing.” 16 Sartre’s note: Cf.  L’Imaginaire (NRF, 1940), Conclusion.  TN: Translated as Sartre (2004b).  17 TN: The French poet Paul Valéry (1871–1945) uses the phrase “divine absence” in his poem “Fragments of the ‘Narcissus,’ ” contained in English translation in Valéry (2007).  18 Sartre’s note: Esquisse d’une Théorie des Émotions (Hermann, Paris, 1939).  TN: Translated as Sartre (1994).  19 TN:… “tu dois, donc tu peux”… This Kantian doctrine is normally expressed in English as “ought implies can.” 20 TN:… des “tendances”… See my note on tendance in Notes on the Translation.  21 TN: I have used “pederast” in its old-fashioned use to mean (male) homosexual, to match Sartre’s use of pédéraste , which is an outdated French term with the same meaning.  22 TN:… de la liberté et de la bonne volonté? Sartre’s reference to “the good will” here is presumably philosophical; he may be thinking of Kant’s philosophy.  23 TN: Hegel describes this “fight” in his Phenomenology of Spirit (Hegel 1977).  24 TN:… les concepts amphiboliques… encore que leur amphibolie… Sartre’s term amphibolique is more precise in meaning than “ambiguous” (which translates as ambigu ), but as there is no corresponding English term of comparable precision I use “ambiguous” here.  As Littré explains, while ambigu applies to a word or sentence that has more than one meaning , amphibolique applies to a construction whose meaning is uncertain , as in cases when the grammar makes it possible to interpret a sentence in either of two ways.  The French regard such sentences as linguistically deficient.  25 TN:… résignée à ne pas être remplie par ces évidences… Although “fulfilled” sounds a little odd in this sentence, it is necessary in order to retain the Husserlian vocabulary used here.  26 TN:… c’est la foi du charbonnier.  The French expression Sartre uses here literally means “the coal-man’s faith”; it is used in idiomatic French to denote simple or naïve faith—the faith of a simple man.  27 Sartre’s note: If it is a matter of indifference whether to be in good or bad faith, because bad faith takes hold of good faith and slides into its project even at its origin, that does not mean that we are unable radically to escape from bad faith.  But that would require corrupted being to reclaim itself.  We will call this “authenticity”: its description does not belong here.  Part Two: Being-For-Itself Chapter 1: The Immediate Structures of the For-Itself 1 TN: I translate Sartre’s présence à soi as “self-presence” rather than the clunkier “presence to self.” The reader should therefore bear in mind the element of “distance” (between the for-itself and itself) implied by Sartre’s phrase.  2 TN: The Megarian school of philosophy was founded in the fourth century BC by Eucleides of Megara.  Among their doctrines was a rejection of the evidence of the senses, from which perhaps Sartre derives the “isolation of essences” mentioned in this sentence.  3 TN: “Existential analytic” is Heidegger’s phrase.  He claims that fundamental ontology must begin with an “existential analytic” of Dasein (Heidegger 1980: §4).  4 TN:… il mène à tout à condition d’en sortir.  This phrase was used by the writer and journalist Jules Jannin (1804–1874) to characterize journalism; it has been adapted numerous times in French.  5 TN: Sartre is quoting from his earlier discussion of Heidegger’s formula at EN 29.  6 TN: The term concept-limite is used in French to render the German term Grenzbegriff .  In Kantian philosophy it often means a concept that signals the limits of sense-experience.  It is usually translated into English either as “boundary concept” or as “limiting concept,” which is why I remove Sartre’s hyphen.  7 TN: Sartre is referring to the method of “psychological observation” advocated by the French philosopher Victor Cousin (1792–1867) as a means to discovering the nature of consciousness and its elements.  8 TN: The Greek term in this sentence is usually transliterated as epoché .  See my note in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  The German verb mitmachen means “to participate”; the idea here is that the reflective stance moves us out of our everyday “participative” attitude.  9 TN: Spinoza discusses self-consciousness as the “idea of an idea” in his Ethics (Spinoza 1985).  10 TN:… qui dépasse et lève les moments abstraits… Sartre refers here to Hegel’s concept of “sublation” ( Aufhebung ); see my note on dépasser in the section on Hegel vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  Hegel himself points out that the German verb aufheben can mean “to raise up.” 11 TN:… un reflet qui est sa propre réflexion.  The final word in this French sentence is commonly used to denote “reflection” as a cognitive activity.  This is slightly less clear in the English.  12 TN: In this context—in which Sartre alludes to linguistic forms— réfléchi should be translated as “reflexive” (as in “reflexive pronouns”).  It should be noted that the same word in French ( réfléchi ) is used for “reflected” and “reflexive.” 13 TN: In this paragraph I have moved from “itself” to “himself,” where Sartre uses the same French term— soi —for both.  (See my discussion of pronouns in Notes on the Translation.) In this particular sentence I have changed Sartre’s example to preserve his point: he uses il s’ennuie , whose reflexive structure vanishes in English translation (“he is bored”).  Replacing the verb by “to wash oneself” provides the structure Sartre wants.  14 TN:… comme “foi du charbonnier.” Sartre uses this idiomatic expression again here.  15 TN: Sartre is referring here to the second “proof” offered by Descartes in his Principles (Descartes 1983).  16 TN: Heidegger discusses the Ruf des Gewissens at Heidegger (1980: §54).  It is usually translated as the “call of conscience.” 17 Sartre’s note: Cf.  earlier in this work, Introduction, section III.  18 Sartre’s note: Indeed, this piece of reasoning is based explicitly on the requirements of reason.  19 Sartre’s note: Part One, Chapter 2, section II: Forms of bad faith.  20 TN:… un piège aux alouettes fascinant et engluant… The French idiom used here invokes a “trap for larks” (in which a mirror or decoy is used).  A corresponding English idiom might be “smoke and mirrors.” 21 TN: Sartre’s word souci is the standard French translation for Heidegger’s term Sorge in Being and Time , which is in turn standardly translated into English as “care.” 22 Sartre’s note: Hegel’s opposition belongs to this type of negation.  But this opposition must itself be founded on a basic internal negation, i.e., on a lack.  If, for example, the inessential becomes in its turn the essential, that is because it is felt as a lack within the essential.  23 TN: Sartre’s stylistic effects in this sentence are not fully translatable into English.  In particular “missed” does not fully capture Sartre’s pun, where manqué means both “missed” and “failed.” See my note on manquer in Notes on the Translation.  24 TN:… ce ne peut être que soi.  In this passage I use “itself” to express what I take to be Sartre’s core idea (using occasional variants or additional words where these are needed to communicate additional meaning).  See my note on soi in Notes on the Translation.  25 TN:… l’objet d’une thèse.  By “thesis,” Sartre means a thetic act of consciousness, in which an object is explicitly posited – as contrasted, as the text goes on to explain, with the “non-thetic” consciousness exemplified in the prereflective cogito .  26 TN:… en souffrance.  There is an untranslatable pun here, as the French expression en souffrance is also used to characterize something (e.g., a payment or delivery) that is overdue, or outstanding.  27 TN: Sartre has already alluded to Scheler in Part One.  The phenomenological account of values to which Sartre refers here is available in translation as Scheler (1973).  28 Sartre’s note: It is perhaps tempting to translate into Hegelian terms the trinity we are examining, and to make the in-itself into the thesis, the for-itself into the antithesis, and the in-itself-for-itself—or Value—the synthesis.  But we should note here that, if the in-itself is missing from for-itself, the for-itself is not missing from the in-itself.  The opposition is not therefore reciprocal.  In brief, the for-itself remains inessential and contingent in relation to the in-itself, and this inessential character is what we referred to earlier as “facticity.” In addition, although the synthesis or Value does indeed return to the thesis and therefore involves a self-return, it is an unrealizable totality, and so the for-itself is not a moment that can be surpassed.  As such, its nature is much closer to Kierkegaard’s “ambiguous” realities.  In addition, we find here a twofold structure of unilateral oppositions: in one sense, the in-itself is missing from the for-itself, and the for-itself is not missing from the in-itself – but, in another sense, what is missing from the for-itself is its possible (or the missing for-itself), while the for-itself, again, is not missing from the possible.  29 TN: Although the sentence suggests this quote comes from Leibniz, I have not been able to find it there verbatim.  However, it is consonant with Leibniz’s claims about how to conceive our relationship to God.  30 TN:… l’être des possibles.  See my note on possible in Notes on the Translation.  31 TN: “Compossible” is an adjective used by Leibniz to mean individuals that are capable of existing alongside each other, i.e., in the same possible world.  32 TN: Louis Couturat (1868–1914) was a French philosopher, author of an influential book about Leibniz, La Logique de Leibniz .  The collection of previously unpublished writings by Leibniz which Couturat edited, and to which Sartre refers here, is Opuscules et Fragments Inédits de Leibniz (Paris, 1903).  33 TN: L’en-soi est en acte.  The last two words belong to Aristotelian terminology, and are most often translated into English as “in actuality.” 34 TN: For protension , see my note in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  35 TN: Epicurus is the ancient Greek philosopher best known for his view that death should not be feared.  An important aspect of his view concerns the proper attitude that humans should take up toward their various desires.  My translation of remplir as “to replenish” in the preceding sentence has been influenced by the reference in this passage to Epicurus: Epicurus’s translators often use “replenishment.” 36 TN: I assume there is a mistake in the French, which says de reste , and that du reste —which I translate as “besides”—was intended.  37 TN: See my note on ipséité in Notes on the Translation.  38 TN: See my note on possibiliser in Notes on the Translation.  39 TN: The article Sartre refers to is published as The Transcendence of the Ego (Sartre 2004a), which was indeed first published in the journal Recherches Philosophiques , for 1936–37.  40 TN: In addition to the term Erlebnisse , the concept of a “unifying pole” belongs to Husserl’s work.  41 TN:… non comme de la conscience.  Sartre means this phrase (which appears twice in this paragraph) to have a double meaning: something may either be “of” consciousness by being made out of it, or by belonging to it.  I try to convey this with the additional word in square brackets.  42 TN:… son propre soi.  Here I give both ways of translating soi , as Sartre seems to exploit both.  43 TN: Here again Sartre may be exploiting both meanings of soi : “self” (as in Ego) and “itself” (as in for-itself).  See my note on soi in Notes on the Translation.  44 Sartre’s note: We will see in Part Two, Chapter 3, the ways in which this definition—which we are provisionally adopting—is inadequate and erroneous.  45 TN: I follow the French text in placing the first “is” in this sentence in brackets and italics.  Chapter 2: Temporality 1 TN: The German word Unselbstständigkeit arises frequently in philosophical texts, and roughly translates as “dependence.” It is of course the opposite of Selbstständigkeit , used earlier in the text.  2 Sartre’s note: L’Imagination (Alcan, 1936).  TN: Translated into English as Sartre (2012).  3 TN: Édouard Claparède (1873–1940) was a Swiss psychologist.  In keeping with English translations of Claparède, I translate moïité here as “me-ness.” Claparède’s view was that a feeling of me-ness was necessary for any image or experience to become a memory.  Sartre mentions his work in both his earlier texts on the imagination.  4 TN: By James, Sartre is of course referring to the American psychologist William James.  5 TN: Sartre is alluding to the theory of the French sociologist Maurice Halbwachs (1877–1945), who emphasized the social aspect to personal memory.  6 TN: According to the psychological doctrine known in France as génétisme , our capacity to perceive spatial relations in the world is not innate but acquired.  7 TN: Bergson’s Time and Free Will provides an early statement of his account of duration as an “interpenetrating multiplicity” (Bergson 1960).  8 TN: For rétention , see my note in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  9 TN: In Ancient Rome the Lares deities were domestic gods, believed to guard over the household.  The family Lar was often represented by a small statue, placed in a shrine.  10 TN: Si donc je dis de Paul qu’il fut ou qu’il était élève de Polytechnique… Since each of these two different tenses of être translates into English as “was,” I have altered Sartre’s sentence in order to make the same point.  11 TN: André Malraux (1901–1976) was an influential French novelist.  Sartre slightly misquotes a sentence from Malraux’s 1937 novel L’Espoir (translated into English as Malraux 1970).  It should read as: La tragédie de la mort est en ceci qu’elle transforme la vie en destin (“The tragedy of death lies in the fact that it transforms life into destiny”).  12 TN: I have had difficulty in tracking down this scientist or his work, but Sartre is probably referring to one H.  Chevalier, who worked on magnetism at the turn of the twentieth century.  13 TN: Sartre gives this phrase in Greek.  Transliterated, it says Hýsteron próteron and means “the latter one first” (i.e., “the wrong way round”).  14 TN:… “Je me suis.” The reflexive way in which Sartre makes this point cannot be preserved in translation.  15 TN: This play by Sophocles is also sometimes translated with the English title The Women of Trachis .  I do not know if Sartre was quoting from a published version or from memory.  I have quoted Deïanira’s line from David Raeburn’s translation (Sophocles 2008).  16 TN: Sartre quotes this at EN 147.  17 TN: Sartre is alluding here to the first line of the famous poem “The Tomb of Edgar Poe” published by Stéphane Mallarmé in French in 1887.  The line is often translated into English as “As to Himself at last eternity changes him” (Mallarmé 1996: 71).  18 TN: Le passé c’est l’en-soi que je suis en tant que dépassé.  Sartre uses the same pun elsewhere in the text.  19 TN: Sartre has already quoted this expression from Hegel at EN 70.  20 TN: This work is translated into English as Husserl (1991).  21 TN:… il se présentifie… For  se  présentifier , see the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  22 TN: Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827), a French astronomer and mathematician, is often said to be the first person to formulate causal determinism.  23 TN:… qui est son propre avenir… qui est à-venir… Sartre repeats the pun used earlier.  24 TN: As the sentence in the French text is ungrammatical, the suggested “and” is mine.  25 TN: Sartre quotes Leibniz’s description of the present as “pregnant with the future” from §22 of the Monadology (Leibniz 2014: 18).  The other phrases in quotation marks a few lines later are harder to place.  The “awaiting” phrase probably alludes to Heidegger.  26 TN: I have been unable to find this quotation in Heidegger.  27 TN: Sartre uses the two synonymous terms for “future” available in French (but not in English) to differentiate the future of the for-itself ( futur ) from the future ( avenir ) of the world: Mais ainsi, par le futur, un avenir arrive au monde .  28 TN: In fact the more common expression exhorts one to “become who one is .” This is the phrase famously used, for example, in the title of Nietzsche’s Ecce Homo (Nietzsche 2009).  29 TN:… devoir être “un creux toujours futur.” Sartre puts the phrase within quotation marks because he is citing it from Paul Valéry’s poem “Le Cimetière Marin.” There are various English translations of this famous poem; the rather literal translation I have provided here seems to map Sartre’s intended meaning.  30 TN: Sartre is referring to the grammatical tense.  31 TN: “Que la République était belle sous l’Empire!” The French historian Alphonse Aulard (1849–1928) famously said this in 1885, expressing his disappointment with the current regime.  32 TN:… au cours du temps… Sartre must have Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason (Kant 1998) in mind, but the generality of his allusion precludes identification of any specific passage.  33 TN: “Laisse faire le temps”… Sartre is quoting from Corneille’s play Le Cid , Act V, Scene 7.  I quote from the English translation by John C.  Lapp (Corneille 2012).  34 TN: L’instant est… intemporel… The French adjectives intemporel and atemporel are synonymous, but, as Sartre uses both, I translate the former as “timeless” and the latter as “atemporal.” 35 TN: With this expression Sartre is probably alluding to Bergson’s remark in Creative Evolution , chapter 1.  As the English translation puts it: “If I want to mix a glass of sugar and water, I must… wait until the sugar melts.  This little fact is big with meaning” (Bergson 1911a: 9).  36 TN:… comment se constitue le percipitur… The Latin percipitur literally means “it is perceived.” Sartre therefore is asking “How is what is perceived constituted?” 37 TN: Jules Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) was a French mathematician, physicist, and philosopher of science.  The French text uses a division sign here between a and c, but I think there must have been a mistake transcribing the manuscript.  The “does not equal” symbol (≠) makes far more sense of the text.  38 TN: Émile Meyerson (1859–1933) was a Polish-born chemist and philosopher of science, who moved to France aged 22 and died there.  Meyerson claimed that the goal of scientific reason was to explain experience through identification.  The diversity discovered in reality shows its recalcitrance to reason.  39 TN: This is the adjectival counterpart to the German noun Sartre has used earlier: it is used to characterize something as not being capable of existing on its own, or independently.  40 TN: Sartre may be alluding here to Hegel’s famous sentence in Phenomenology of Spirit in which Hegel criticizes a view of absolute knowledge based on immediate intuition, arguing that its dissolution of all differentiation in what we know leaves us in “the night in which all cows are black” (Hegel 1977: 9).  41 TN:… passéification d’un présent… See my note on passéifier in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  42 TN: In these sentences Sartre uses the names of grammatical tenses to describe forms of the temporal past.  43 TN:… perdre tous ses droits? I translate droits (literally “rights”) as “authority,” which seems to me to be the closest semantic equivalent in ordinary English.  Note that this loses a potentially significant connection (in the original text) with ideas of “right,” “law,” and “entitlement.” 44 TN: This is one of the passages where Sartre’s account, involving both a “first-level” (and inescapable) reflection within the for-itself, and a second-level (optional) reflection as a cognitive act, makes clear English translation difficult, as the same English word—“reflection”—appears at both levels.  In this sentence, Sartre begins by talking about the cognitive act, but the “reflection” and “reflecting” at the end of the sentence refer to the first-level structure.  See my note on réfléchir , etc., in Notes on the Translation.  45 TN:… le pour-soi reflétant se pose… comme témoin du reflet et… le pour-soi reflétant se pose… comme reflet de ce reflétant.  I quote to make it clear that the “reflecting” and “reflection” in this sentence are at the most basic level of being of the for-itself.  46 Sartre’s note: Here we rediscover that “division of the self-identical” which for Hegel is distinctive of consciousness.  But, rather than leading to a higher integration, as it does in Phenomenology of Spirit , this scission only hollows out more deeply and more irremediably the nothingness that separates consciousness from itself.  Consciousness is Hegelian—but that is its greatest illusion.  TN: The passage Sartre has in mind is at Hegel (1977: 100–101).  47 TN: La réflexion impure… complice… Barnes translated réflexion complice as “accessory reflection,” presumably because complice can have the (legal) sense of a “partner in crime.” I think the ordinary English adjective “complicit” is closer to the intended meaning.  48 TN:… une conduite liée… This phrase is difficult to translate: the idea is that doubt is not contained within an instant, it is an activity , and so it involves the “combination” (in the Kantian sense) of several elements over time.  49 TN: On parle d’une joie que j’ai… It sounds a little strange to say in English “I have joy,” but it is easy to think of similar expressions, to make Sartre’s point just as effectively.  Think for example of the phrase “I have great delight in announcing…” I have not changed the example, because Sartre uses “joy” so often in the text.  50 TN: The French visitation , like the English “visitation,” is used in Christian writings to refer specifically to the arrival of some divine being.  Sartre may intend this ambiguity.  51 TN:… qui s’historialise dans son surgissement… For historialiser , see the section on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  52 TN:… pour être à lui-même ce qu’il est.  Although I would normally translate pour in this sentence as “in order to,” Sartre intends to connect this (purposive) sense of pour with the pour-soi (“ for-itself ”) mode of being.  To capture this connection in the English, I use the phrase “for the purpose of,” which allows me to use (and repeat) the word “for.” 53 TN:… est-pour-être… The emphasis of for and the inserted square brackets are mine: again, I am trying to reproduce the pattern in Sartre’s use of pour .  54 TN:… ce dédoublement se fait par approfondissement du néant qui sépare le reflet du reflétant.  This is another instance where the English makes it more difficult to recognize the switch in focus, in this last part of Sartre’s sentence, to the “first-level” reflection that is a permanent structure of the for-itself.  55 TN: Sartre is referring implicitly to his earlier short book The Transcendence of the Ego (Sartre 2004a).  56 TN: Carlo Andrea Pozzo di Borgo (1768–1842) was a Corsican nobleman who entered the Russian diplomatic service and was active in opposing Napoleonic interests.  57 TN: D’où l’expression de “tête à gifles,” de “menton qui attire les coups”… As these phrases do not have close English equivalents, I have had to approximate.  58 TN: Sartre means “medium” in the sense of a psychic (a person who allows absent voices to speak to them).  59 TN: Sartre borrows the phrase “in person” from Husserl.  See my note on en personne in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  60 TN: The Passions of the Soul is a treatise by Descartes, written in 1649 and translated as Descartes (1989).  61 TN: This Greek term is transliterated as sugchusis .  Literally meaning “pouring together,” it refers to a state of fusion of elements that are thoroughly blended together.  62 TN: Sartre is referring to the British philosopher John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), and the account of laws of causation developed in Mill’s System of Logic , published in 1843 and included in Mill (1963–91).  63 Sartre’s note: Du Côté de chez Swann , 37th edition, II, p.  82, my emphasis.  TN: I have taken the English passage which corresponds to the French quoted (and emphasized at parts) by Sartre from Swann’s Way , in the translation by C.  K.  Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin, and revised by D.  J.  Enright (Proust 2005: 366).  Chapter 3: Transcendence 1 TN: Sartre is repeating verbatim this sentence from EN 38, above.  2 TN: Sartre is once again referring to his revision of Heidegger’s formula, first discussed at EN 29.  3 TN:… “souvenirs d’idées.” I have not been able to track down this phrase in Descartes.  4 TN: Sartre probably has in mind the opposition of the Self and not-Self (or the I and not-I) in German Idealist philosophy.  Both Hegel and Fichte refer to the “not-I.” I have translated non-moi as “not-self” here.  5 TN: The French text has “table” instead of the second instance of “cup.” Assuming this is a mistake, I have corrected it in the English.  6 TN:… le terme-origine… The phrase that I translate (literally) as “origin-term” is also unusual in French.  Sartre may have a mathematical series in mind, and be referring to the first term, from which the rest of the series is generated.  7 TN: See my note on réaliser in Notes on the Translation.  8 TN: Sartre is probably alluding to Heidegger (1978c) here, as earlier in the text.  9 TN: Sartre has already quoted this phrase at EN 49.  10 TN: Sartre’s 1939 article about Husserl, “Une idée fondamentale de la phénoménologie de Husserl: L’intentionnalité ” (translated as Sartre 1970), focused on just this “digestive” model of knowledge.  11 TN: As earlier in the text, Sartre puns in this passage on à venir and avenir .  12 TN: As the phrase en bloc is also used in English, I have left it in French.  13 TN: Husserl discusses categories in several of his philosophical writings.  Sartre is probably thinking of Logical Investigations (Husserl 2001).  14 This sentence sounds odd, because it is in Part Two.  Sartre presumably means to refer to an earlier passage within Part Two (probably in Chapter 1).  15 TN:… l’homme réalise le beau… Here I translate réaliser as “to realize” because of its connection to the “unrealizable” mentioned in the preceding sentence.  See my note on réaliser in Notes on the Translation.  16 TN:… sous forme de… “sursis”… See my note on en sursis in the section on Heidegger vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  17 TN: Sartre has already mentioned Heidegger’s account of the world in these terms earlier in the text (e.g., at EN 141).  18 TN:… comme à réaliser par moi , puisque le moi est une structure transcendante… I have translated Sartre’s moi as “me” in the first instance, and “ ego ” in the second, as Sartre is clearly reiterating the central claim of his earlier essay The Transcendence of the Ego (Sartre 2004a).  19 TN: Heidegger uses the phrase Worumwillen , in Being and Time , where it is translated into English as “for-the-sake-of-which.” The idea is that, in inquiring about what some equipment is for, we will end up mentioning Dasein , the user (Heidegger 1980: §18).  To build the bridge to Heidegger’s text, in this sentence I translate Sartre’s pour qui as “For whose sake?” 20 TN: Heidegger uses the term Weltzeit in his seminal discussion of time (see Heidegger 1980: §82), translated into English as “world-time” (sometimes without the hyphen) and into French as le temps du monde .  As Heidegger’s account of time is so central to the discussion to which Sartre is contributing, I have preserved the (implicit) allusion to Heidegger in my translation of the phrase— le temps du monde —used by Sartre to give this section its title.  21 TN: The quotation marks around this phrase suggest Sartre has some author in mind; it may be Bergson, who invokes the role of recognition in perception in Matter and Memory (Bergson 1911b).  22 TN:… mais comme étant lui.  Here I have rendered lui as “it.” 23 TN: The “scholar” to whom Sartre refers must be Bergson, who describes time’s “homogenization” in space in Bergson (1960).  24 TN: Here I translate apparition as “apparition,” as in this context Sartre clearly means to refer to events .  25 TN: I use “to translate,” even though it sounds a little odd, to match Sartre’s French verb translater , which is normally only used in mathematical contexts.  26 TN: Sartre is alluding to Pascal’s criticism of Descartes, at §77 of his Pensées (translated as Pascal 1995): “I cannot forgive Descartes.  In all his philosophy he would have been quite willing to dispense with God.  But he had to make Him give a fillip to set the world in motion; beyond this he has no further need of God.’ ” 27 TN: Sartre is alluding to the “contraction hypothesis” advanced by the Irish physicist George Francis Fitzgerald (1851–1901).  28 Sartre’s note: Chapter 3, section II.  29 TN: L’espace est le néant de rapport… This might be expressed in more ordinary English as “Space is a null-relation,” but, as Sartre uses néant (which is also odd in French), I retain “nothingness.” 30 TN:… ne peut donc s’interpréter qu’en termes d’être… le lieu étant fondé par l’être, l’être n’est plus assez … I quote here to indicate Sartre’s switch in reference from “being” in the abstract, in the preceding sentence, to some particular being in this sentence.  31 TN:… aventure contingente de l’être.  As earlier, Sartre means a particular being—or entity—here, e.g., some moving thing.  32 TN: I assume that the original text— ce qui sous-entend objectivement —contains a mistake, and that Sartre intended to use the verb sous-tendre , which he uses elsewhere, to mean “to underpin.” Part Three: Being-for-the-Other Chapter 1: The Other’s Existence 1 TN:… pensée, mais non conçue.  Although “think” and “conceive” seem very close in meaning, Sartre may be thinking here of Kant’s distinction between being able to “think” something and to “know” it, i.e., to fully “conceive” it.  2 Sartre’s note: Even if we were to escape Kant’s metaphysics of nature, and the table of principles he drew up, it would be possible to conceive of radically different systems of physics on the basis of those principles.  3 TN: Sartre is referring to the American psychologist John B.  Watson (1878–1958), who is usually regarded as the founder of behaviorism.  4 TN: Sartre is thinking of the passage in Schopenhauer (2008: 124) where he writes, “As a serious conviction, on the other hand, it theoretical egoism could be found only in a madhouse; as such, what is then needed in response to it is not so much a proof as a cure.” 5 TN:… comme le réel objectif… I have slightly altered the sentence, as Sartre’s use of “ le réel ” as a substantive sounds so odd in English (“an objective real”).  6 Sartre’s note: “The Transcendence of the Ego,” in Recherches Philosophiques (1937).  TN: Sartre’s reference is to the journal where the text was originally published.  It is translated into English as Sartre (2004a).  7 TN: Sartre would have found this quotation in Lefebvre’s anthology.  I quote from the English translation, at Hegel (1986: 62, §31).  8 Sartre’s note: Phénoménologie de l’Esprit , p.  148 (Edition Lasson).  TN: Sartre found this passage in the Lefebvre anthology.  The corresponding passage in the English translation is Hegel (1977: 116, §191) (which I have altered slightly in the text to match Sartre’s French—for example, by using “Master” and “Slave” rather than “Lord” and “Bondsman”).  9 Sartre’s note: Propedeutik , p.  20 (first edition of the complete works).  TN: Sartre found this quotation in the Lefebvre anthology.  The corresponding passage in the English translation is at Hegel (1986: 63, §39) (from which I depart slightly to match Sartre’s French).  10 Sartre’s note: Propedeutik , p.  20 (first edition of the complete works).  TN: The counterpart English translation is at Hegel (1986: 59, §23).  11 TN: Sartre does not provide a reference for this quotation, which comes from Phenomenology of Spirit and is included in Morceaux Choisis .  The corresponding English translation is at Hegel (1977: 113, §186).  I have departed from it where necessary to match Sartre’s French.  12 Sartre’s note: Propedeutik , p.  18.  TN: The corresponding passage in English translation is Hegel (1986: 61, §31).  13 Sartre’s note: Phenomenology of Spirit .  Ibid.  TN: The corresponding passage in English translation is Hegel (1977: 113, §§186–187).  I have made slight changes to the translation to match Sartre’s French.  14 TN: Sartre is paraphrasing Hegel’s famous claim that “the True is the whole” (Hegel 1977: 11, §20).  15 TN:… les consciences… By emphasizing les , I take it that Sartre is emphasizing that the article is in the plural (which gets lost in the English “the”).  16 TN: Sartre has already referred to Heidegger’s definition of the world earlier in the text (at EN 141).  The German word Befindlichkeit means “state of mind,” and Verstand means “understanding.” Both terms are translated that way in Heidegger (1980).  17 TN: This German phrase means “ Dasein is in each case mine”; it appears in Heidegger (1980: §9).  18 TN: Heidegger discusses the meanings of “in” in relation to these Latin words, with the exception of insum (which may be Sartre’s mistake), in Heidegger (1980: §12).  19 TN:… sous la forme du “on.” As earlier in the text, I follow Heidegger’s translators in rendering das Man as “the they.” 20 TN: Heidegger’s translators render Worumwillen as “for-the-sake-of-which.” Sartre has already used this term, at EN 237.  21 TN: The phrase quoted by Sartre is from a well-known passage at the end of André Gide’s prose poem, published in French in 1897, Les Nourritures Terrestres : “Ce qu’un autre aurait aussi bien fait que toi, ne le fais pas.  Ce qu’un autre aurait aussi bien dit que toi, ne le dis pas, – aussi bien écrit que toi, ne l’écris pas.  Ne t’attache en toi qu’à ce que tu sens qui n’est nulle part ailleurs qu’en toi-même, et crée de toi, impatiemment ou patiemment, ah! le plus irremplaçable des êtres .” Translated as Gide (1949).  22 TN: Sartre has already used this Greek phrase earlier in the text (see Part Two, Chapter 2, note 13).  23 TN: The German term Stimmung is usually translated as “mood.” The untranslatability mentioned by Sartre here is Heidegger’s achievement.  Because Heidegger argues that Stimmung should not be conceived as a psychological phenomenon, and connects it with the verb stimmen (“to attune”), Stambaugh suggests (in her translation of Heidegger 2010) that the metaphorical “attunement” works well.  24 TN: Sartre does not provide enough detail here to identify one particular passage in Plato, who talks in several dialogues about various forms of “alienation” (by which he means madness).  As for the term ek-stasis , Hazel Barnes hints in her translation that Sartre may in fact have been thinking of Neo-Platonic writings (Sartre 1992: 249).  25 TN: The French philosopher Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715) argues that “we see all things in God” (Malebranche 1997: 230).  This doctrine is also known as “Vision in God” in English.  26 Sartre’s note: Les Théories de l’Induction et de l’Expérimentation .  TN: Pierre André Lalande (1867–1963) was a French philosopher, who taught at the ENS and the Sorbonne.  The book to which Sartre refers was published in 1929.  27 TN:… mais en tant qu’il “intéresse” notre être… Sartre puns on the French verb intéresser ; the scare quotes bring to the fore, I think, a range of meanings such as “to have an interest i.e., stake in something” or something’s “being in one’s interest.” Translated into English, the sentence does this less successfully.  28 TN: See my note on regarder in Notes on the Translation.  29 TN: Kant’s German term Empfindung is usually translated as “sensation.” 30 TN:… une fuite rigoureusement colmatée… Although as a rule I translate fuir as “to flee” and fuite as “flight,” I think that the hydraulic imagery used here (e.g., drainage hole, etc.) makes “leak” the better translation.  31 TN: As the French phrase coup de main is used in English, in military contexts, and there is no corresponding English phrase, I have left it untranslated.  It refers to a military operation that depends on catching the enemy by surprise and direct assault.  It seems likely that Sartre is thinking of tactics used by the French Resistance in the Second World War.  32 TN: The expression éviter le regard is used in French in contexts where one is avoiding exposure, attention, or scrutiny.  If I did not have to include the word “look,” a smoother English translation here might be “the risk of being seen.” 33 TN:… objets d’une thèse… See my note on thèse in the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  34 Sartre’s note: L’Imaginaire (NRF, 1940).  TN: This text is translated as Sartre (2004b).  35 TN:… comme étant vraiment en train d’écouter… Here the need to find an English sentence that uses Sartre’s emphasized participle being causes some awkwardness.  36 TN: K.  and the land surveyor are central characters in Kafka’s novels The Trial (Kafka 1994) and The Castle (Kafka 2009), respectively.  37 TN:… elle le démondanise au contraire… I have matched Sartre’s neologistic démondaniser with the neologistic verb “to unworld.” 38 TN: The German phrase means “I am I”; Sartre has discussed Hegel’s use of this equation in the previous section.  39 TN:… ce “monstre incomparable et préférable à tout ”… Sartre is alluding to a passage (about human egoism) in Malraux’s novel La Condition Humaine , published in France in 1933 and translated as Malraux (1990).  40 TN:… les soldats du corps franc… As before, Sartre is thinking of the Resistance fighters in the French Occupation.  41 TN:… je ne cesse plus d’éprouver mon être-pour-autrui… See my discussion of éprouver in the section on vocabulary relating to the mind in Notes on the Translation.  42 TN:… un être n’est pas situé par son rapport… Although Sartre’s use of un être (“a being”) in this sentence hypothetically includes non-human beings, I think the intended reference is limited to humans and so I use the pronoun “he” rather than “it.” Sartre’s allusions to the côté de Guermantes and the côté de Swann are of course to Proust’s À la Recherche du Temps Perdu .  For “hodological,” see the section on vocabulary relating to the mind in Notes on the Translation.  43 TN: Sartre puts the brackets round et in this sentence, presumably to remind the reader that the Other as subject and as object are in one sense the same person.  44 TN:… par l’apparition d’un pour-soi mondifiant.  I borrow the neologistic “to enworld,” used in English translations of Heidegger, for Sartre’s neologistic mondifier .  The idea is that the for-itself brings with it and actualizes its own world.  45 TN:… qu’il convient de réserver le mot de “on.” As explained in Notes on the Translation, as Sartre is borrowing Heidegger’s concept of das Man , “they”—and not “one”—is the best translation.  46 TN:… le pour-soi que je suis a à être ce qu’il est… comme soi-même.  This passage causes difficulty in relation to Sartre’s pronouns.  Note that I translate soi-même as “its self” to differentiate it from soi , which I translate as “itself.” 47 TN:… comme soi-même refusé.  I think “oneself” rather than “himself” better captures the intended meaning here.  48 TN:… en tant qu’il est soi-même qui me refuse.  Further difficulties with pronouns arise in this paragraph – in this sentence, I switch in the translation of soi-même from “oneself” to “himself,” signaling this switch with the square brackets.  49 TN:… par effondrement du Moi-même.  It is not possible to match the surplus meaning Sartre is exploiting in Moi-même : his intention is to emphasize the Moi (“Me”) component within the word moi-même (which is ordinarily straightforwardly translated as “myself” in English).  To honor the oddity introduced by Sartre’s upper-case “M,” I am translating Moi-même as “(my) Me-self,” with the cost that the English sounds even odder than the French.  50 TN:… en refusant de “faire avec” (au sens de l’allemand: mit-machen ).  Here Sartre uses faire avec to mirror the components of the quoted German term mit-machen “to make” and “with”).  I have had to approximate.  51 TN:… c’est cet engagement… In this passage Sartre slides from using the verb engager in the sense of “to commit” to using it in the more physical sense of “to engage” (as a knife is engaged in a wound).  To accommodate this shift in sense, I have used both words in this sentence, i.e., “commitment or engagement.” See my note on engager in Notes on the Translation.  52 Sartre’s note: Part Two, Chapter 3, section III.  53 Sartre’s note: Cf.  my Esquisse d’une Théorie Phénoménologique des Émotions .  TN: Sartre gets the title of his book slightly wrong; it is translated into English as Sartre (1994).  54 TN:… le “reflet-reflétant” réfléchi existe pour un “reflet-reflétant” réflexif.  I quote to show the difference between the levels of reflection in play in this sentence (which is concealed in translation).  55 TN: As Sartre is referring in this passage to the impossible self-coincidence at which consciousness aims, I think soi needs to be translated as “itself” rather than “self,” but I insert the French term to remind the reader of the ambiguity in the French.  See my note on soi in the section on pronouns in Notes on the Translation.  56 TN: Leucippus (fifth century BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher, sometimes said to have been the first to introduce the theory of atomism.  57 TN:… l’esprit .  Sartre’s italics here probably signal an allusion to Hegel’s term Geist .  Chapter 2: The Body 1 TN: Sartre is probably thinking of the title of Descartes’s Second Meditation: “Of the Nature of the Human Mind; and That It Is More Easily Known than the Body” (Descartes 1996: 16).  2 TN: Louis-Victor-Pierre-Raymond de Broglie (1892–1987) was a French physicist who made important contributions to quantum theory.  3 TN: Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) was a German theoretical physicist who made advances in quantum mechanics.  The principle to which Sartre refers is often known as Heisenberg’s “uncertainty principle.” 4 TN: Il nous est arrivé… de servir aux recherches… Throughout this paragraph Sartre uses the plural pronoun nous , but I assume (as elsewhere in the text) that we should understand it as “I.” 5 TN: Auguste Comte (1798–1857) was a French philosopher, best known for his doctrine of positivism.  I have not been able to find the sentence Sartre quotes.  6 TN: The Latin gerundives mean “to be destroyed” and “to be preserved,” respectively.  Cato the Elder is said to have ended his speeches with “Carthage must be destroyed.” 7 TN: The French philosopher Maine de Biran (1766–1824) argued that effort ought to be the central concept for psychology.  8 Sartre’s note: Bachelard, L’Eau et les Rêves (Editions José Corti, 1942).  TN: Translated into English as Bachelard (1983).  9 TN: Sartre is using the term “intention” here as Husserl and his disciples use it, i.e., to refer to an act of an intentionally directed consciousness.  10 TN: James Mark Baldwin (1861–1934) was an American philosopher and psychologist who moved to Paris in later life.  His developmental psychology was an important influence on Piaget.  11 TN: Sartre refers to this idea of Laporte’s earlier as well, at EN 37.  12 TN: Cet objet… appréhendé à travers la douleur, c’est le mal.  In French the expression avoir mal is used to mean “to have a pain (or ache),” or in instances where in English we would say something hurts .  On its own, le mal also means “evil,” and possibly Sartre intends a pun here.  As Sartre is describing the creation of a psychological object , it seems important to translate le mal as a noun, and obviously it needs to be some noun other than “pain” (which I use, contrastively, to translate douleur ).  “Ache” seems to be the term that works best.  13 TN:… les psychologues de la forme… Sartre refers here to the Gestalt psychologists.  See my note in the section on vocabulary relating to the mind in Notes on the Translation.  14 TN:… un “temps” de la mélodie.  In musical contexts, the French noun temps refers to what the “time-signature” denotes, e.g., 4/4 or 6/8 time.  15 TN: In Greek mythology, Antaeus is the son of Poseidon and the Earth goddess Gaea.  He compelled all strangers passing through the country to wrestle with him.  Whenever Antaeus touched the Earth (his mother), his strength was renewed, so that even if he was thrown to the ground he won the fight.  16 TN:… je connais autrui par les sens .  I haven’t been able to establish whether Sartre is quoting anyone in particular here, or simply invoking the empiricist idea that our knowledge is acquired through sense experience.  17 TN: Ainsi est-il esquissé de toutes parts… The French word esquisse is often used (for example, by Ricoeur) to translate Husserl’s Abschattung (usually translated into English as “adumbration”); Sartre’s use of phenomenological vocabulary here (including remplir , “to fulfill”) is not quite as clear in English.  18 TN: Although Sartre does not explicitly mention Bergson in this passage, it seems likely that he has his philosophy in mind: “life” is a topic of much discussion in Bergson (along with the “vital impulse,” etc.).  19 TN:… toujours là comme le dépassé, le passé.  Sartre repeats the pun here.  20 TN: Sartre is referring to the discussion of movement in Part Two, Chapter 3, section IV.  21 TN: Sartre is referring to Abraham (1930), which is not available in English translation.  22 TN: Sartre is not using “sanguine” here in the modern sense but in the sense in which it is used in the theory of the humors, i.e., to mean “relating to the blood, ruddy.” 23 TN: Ernst Kretschmer (1888–1964) was a German psychiatrist who researched the human constitution and established a classification of body types.  Sartre is using “physiognomy” in the archaic sense, where it means the art of judging character from appearance (especially facial appearance).  24 TN: For apprésenter , see the section on Husserl vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  25 TN:… des psychoses comme l’éreutophobie… Sartre uses the specialist medical term, which refers to an irrational fear of blushing (often an element in social anxiety): I have used the corresponding medical term in English.  This disorder would not today be accurately classified as a “psychosis,” a word that Sartre is using loosely.  26 TN: Paul Sollier (1861–1933) was a French doctor and psychologist; his most famous patient was Proust.  Sartre probably meant to use Sollier’s term “ autoscopie ” rather than “ endoscopie ”: the title of one of Sollier’s works (1903) is Les Phénomènes d’Autoscopie .  Sartre’s text tells us what Sollier claimed.  27 TN: I feel sure that Sartre has made a mistake here, and wrote être de référence where he should have put—as elsewhere, throughout— centre de référence .  The former does not make much sense.  Chapter 3: Concrete Relations with the Other 1 TN: From this point on (i.e., when Sartre begins his discussion of love), I will frequently characterize the Other as “she” (even if Sartre has used il ).  See my note on the difficulties presented by gender pronouns in Notes on the Translation for an explanation of my policy in this part of the text.  2 TN:… le déterminisme passionnel… The French adjective passionnel has an old-fashioned feel; it is often used to describe personal relationships.  Sartre may well be influenced by Charles Fourier’s concept attraction passionnelle .  Fourier (1772–1837) was a French socialist philosopher who argued, among other things, for a liberation of man’s passions.  3 TN: La Porte Étroite (1909) is a novel by the French author André Gide.  It is translated into English as Gide (2007).  4 TN: Chrysippus reportedly remarked that “a wise man will turn three somersaults for an adequate fee.” 5 Sartre’s note: The phrase comes from A.  De Waehlens, La Philosophie de Martin Heidegger , p.  99 (Louvain, 1942).  Cf.  also the text from Heidegger which he quotes: “Diese Bezeugung meint hier nicht einen nachträglichen und beiherlaufenden Ausdruck des Menschseins, sondern sie macht das Dasein des Menschen mit aus” ( Hölderlin und das Wesen der Dichtung , p.  6).  TN: The corresponding passage from the published English translation of this text is “This attestation does not mean a subsequent and additional expression of man’s being; rather, it forms a part of man’s existence” (Heidegger 2000: 54).  6 TN: I have made two decisions in relation to this sentence: (a) Sartre starts by referring to le psychopathe , which was at one time used in French to mean “psychiatric patient.” I have not used the English term “psychopath,” because it would be misleading.  (b) He refers to des psychoses d’influence , which does not map onto any phrase in English psychiatric vocabulary.  (Sartre may have come across it through Alfred Lévy’s book, published in France in 1914, La Psychose d’Influence .) The best translation seems to me to be “psychotic delusions of control.” 7 Sartre’s note: Cf.  the following section.  8 Sartre’s note: Ibid.  9 Sartre’s note: At the end of this description, we must categorize at least one form of exhibitionism among the masochistic attitudes—for example, when Rousseau shows the washerwomen “not the obscene object but the ridiculous object.” See Confessions , Book III.  TN: Sartre is referring to a famous incident in Rousseau’s Confessions (published in France in 1782 and translated into English as Rousseau 2008) in which he displays his backside to some washerwomen.  10 TN:… “regarder le regard”… “Gaze” sounds better in this sentence, which is supposed to be idiomatic.  I revert to cognates of “to look” in the following sentence to maintain the centrality of this verb for Sartre.  11 TN: The titles of the books Sartre lists here are translated into English as follows: The Way to Succeed ; Dangerous Liaisons ; Theory of Ambition .  Sartre gets the last title slightly wrong in French: it should be Théorie d’Ambition .  Although only Laclos’s book (translated into English as Laclos 1995) is still well-known today, all of these eighteenth-century works were influential in France.  12 TN: Sartre’s exploration of desire through the idea of trouble (a relatively literary word in French) cannot be translated here completely successfully.  Sartre contrasts “troubled” consciousness with its (normal) translucent state; the analogy with water works in French but not in English because the French phrase eau trouble means “cloudy water” or “muddy water,” whereas its literal English translation as “troubled water(s)” means “moving water(s)” or “turbulent water(s).” The reader should bear the intended connotation of “trouble” in mind.  13 TN: Sartre’s French sentence uses a similar pun: Le corps est bien ici le passé , le dé-passé.  14 TN: Sartre is quoting Nicolas Chamfort (1741–1794), one of the eighteenth-century moralistes .  In his Maximes et Pensées , Chamfort famously says: “ Love… is nothing but the exchange of two fantasies and the contact of two epidermises.’ ” A selection of Chamfort’s aphorisms is available in translation as Chamfort (1969).  15 Sartre’s note: See my Esquisse d’une Théorie Phénoménologique des Émotions .  TN: This text (whose French title Sartre gets slightly wrong here) is translated into English as Sartre (1994).  16 Sartre’s note: Of course, here, as elsewhere, we need to allow for things’ coefficient of adversity.  Objects do not only “caress” us.  But, within the general perspective of the caress, they can also strike us as an “anti-caress,” i.e., with a quality of harshness, cacophony, or hardness that—just because we are in a state of desire—we experience as intolerable.  17 TN:… le thème de la “fausse morte”… The phrase la fausse morte means “false (or “fake”) death,” but, as morte is in the feminine, the reference here is to a falsely dead female .  Sartre probably has in mind the poem by Paul Valéry whose title is that very phrase: “La Fausse Morte.” The phrase petite mort is also used in French as a euphemism for “orgasm,” and indeed Valéry’s poem describes a woman who appears dead but is actually in a state of postcoital stupor.  An English translation is included in Valéry (1950).  18 TN: As before, the term trouble that Sartre uses for the state of sexual arousal does not always translate well as “trouble” in English but, as Sartre clearly intends to be describing the same phenomenon throughout, I am sticking to the term as a reminder (and only occasionally using or adding “arousal” to keep the sexual meaning in view).  19 TN:… un organe sexuel, un sexe… Sartre may intend to exploit different meanings of the French term le sexe here, showing how it can be used as a synonym for “sexual organ” as well as to mean the characteristic of being sexed (i.e., as male or female).  His argument in the text is that we ought not to regard the possession of sexual organs as fundamental to our sexuality.  20 TN: Sartre’s brackets around “of the” is meant to have the same effect as his earlier bracketing in “consciousness (of) self.” As before, the idea is that ordinarily the body, in our consciousness (of the) body, is not an object for consciousness; with the climax of sexual pleasure, Sartre is claiming, the body does become an object of reflection.  21 Sartre’s note: Doña Prouhèze, Le Soulier de Satin , 2nd day: “He will not know the taste that I have.” TN: This play (written by Paul Claudel in 1929) is translated into English as The Satin Slipper (Claudel 1931).  22 TN:… ce qui, en lui, est écoulé.  Sartre’s italicized use of écouler in this context suggests Bergson’s philosophy.  This connection is made explicit a few lines later by Sartre, in the reference to Bergson’s account of gracefulness.  The idea of the mechanical, later in the paragraph, is also influenced by Bergson.  23 TN: Clinamen is the Latin word coined by Lucretius in his defense of the Epicurean doctrine of atomism.  It refers to the allegedly unpredictable “swerve” of atoms, by which free will is secured.  24 TN:… à partir de l’à-venir… Sartre’s pun, used earlier in the text, is repeated here.  25 TN: Carnation in French is a rarely used term, which refers to the color of skin – it is sometimes translated as “skin-tone.” The same word exists in English, although it has fallen into disuse.  I use it here because Sartre clearly wants to make a connection with the idea of “incarnation.” 26 TN: I assume that Sartre’s term assouvissement (satisfaction) is being used euphemistically to mean “orgasm.” 27 TN: Sartre probably borrows the Latin term habitus from the well-known French sociologist Marcel Mauss (1872–1950).  In Mauss’s work habitus refers to someone’s socially acquired dispositions and, in particular, their bodily techniques.  28 Sartre’s note: My emphasis.  29 Sartre’s note: Lumière d’Août , p.  385 (NRF, 1935).  TN: Sartre quotes from the French translation.  The English original is William Faulkner, Light in August , first published in 1932.  The cited passage is from Faulkner (2005: 349–350).  30 Sartre’s note: Compare also maternal love, pity, goodness, etc.  31 TN: The philosopher Jean Wahl (to whom Sartre has already referred earlier in the text) coined the terms “trans-ascendence” and “trans-descendence” to distinguish between two kinds of transcendence; the first moves toward a “higher” being, the second toward something “lower.” 32 TN: Rousseau says this in his Social Contract : “Whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be constrained to do so by the whole body; which means… he shall be forced to be free” (Rousseau 2002: 166).  33 TN: Sartre is quoting from Genesis, chap.  3, verse 7.  34 Sartre’s note: These considerations do not rule out the possibility of a morality of deliverance and salvation.  But this can be achieved only after a radical conversion, which we cannot discuss here.  35 TN: To remind the reader, Mitsein is a reference to Heidegger’s concept in Being and Time , usually translated as “Being-with.” Heidegger uses it to emphasize his point that, for the most part, we experience ourselves not as an isolated “I” but with others .  See Heidegger (1980: chap.  IV).  36 TN: As the collective groupings discussed in this section do not involve love, sex, etc., I have reverted at this point to using the pronoun “he” for the Other.  See my discussion in Notes on the Translation.  37 TN: This Latin phrase means a name or a sound without a corresponding referent.  The phrase is used in philosophy by nominalists, to deny the existence of universals.  38 TN: Jules Romains (1885–1972) was a French writer and a founding member of Unanisme , a literary movement concerned with the experience of group consciousness and collective life.  Romains’s collection of poems La Vie Unanime (“Unanimous Life”) appeared in 1908, and the novel Le Vin Blanc de La Villette (“The White Wine of La Villette”) in 1923.  The street scene that Sartre describes in the text evokes the situations Romains writes about in his poems.  39 Sartre’s note: Part Three, Chapter 1.  40 TN:… que le nous de “ils nous regardent .” Sartre’s example sentence would normally translate into English as “they are looking at us ” but, because the French (in which nous is used for both subject and object) allows Sartre to use the same word (i.e., nous ) in both the sentences he gives as examples, I have rephrased this second sentence using the passive form, which allows the word we to be retained.  An alternative would have been to talk about the us-object .  41 TN: S’il me regarde, je Les éprouve… comme “Eux” (eux-sujets)… Eux is more commonly equivalent to English “them” than to “they,” although in some contexts the latter will be more correct.  And it might seem more appropriate as a means to refer (as Sartre is referring here) to subjects ; however, because I am using “they” (following Heidegger’s translators) to translate l’on , I have stuck to “them” for Eux here.  42 TN: Cet “eux” tend, nous le savons, vers l ’on.  Again, my policy for l’on has required me to modify this sentence in English.  43 TN: Out of interest, the rue Blomet is quite a long street in the 15th arrondissement of Paris.  44 TN:… de délivrer le nous… par l’objectité en le transformant en nous-sujet.  I think Sartre has made a mistake in this sentence and that, instead of par , he meant to write de .  Translating the French text as it is (i.e., without correcting the mistake) would give: “liberating the we… through objecthood.” 45 TN: Boulangisme was a nationalist political movement in France: the politician and general Georges Boulanger (1837–1891) was its figurehead.  It remains a matter of dispute whether it should be understood as primarily a right-wing proto-fascist current or as one which united people on the left.  The context suggests that Sartre has in mind its appeal for left-wing sympathizers.  46 Sartre’s note: Cf.  the numerous cases where ipseity is rejected.  The for-itself refuses to emerge, in anguish, out of the “we.” 47 TN:… comme fin posée par une transcendance quelconque.  Sartre uses quelconque repeatedly in this passage.  It has the meaning of “any old person” or “some arbitrary person,” “whoever,” etc., and it is related to the concept l’on (which I continue to translate as the Heideggerean “they”).  For stylistic reasons I have opted to express this idea using slightly different phrases in different sentences; later in the passage, where there is more emphasis on the word itself, I translate quelconque as “everyman.” 48 TN: “La Motte-Picquet-Grenelle” is the full name of the metro station.  Sartre abridges its name in his earlier mention of it.  49 TN:… “regard qui fait exister cet incident comme un dehors.” I do not know why Sartre puts part of the sentence within quotation marks, or why he emphasizes the subpart.  50 TN:… entre l’épreuve… et l’expérience… See my note on épreuve in the section on vocabulary relating to the mind in Notes on the Translation.  51 TN: Sartre has probably made a mistake here, and intended to write pour-soi , which would make more sense.  Part Four: To Have, To Do, and To Be Chapter 1: Being and doing Freedom 1 TN: La Croix-Rousse is the name of a hill and a district in Lyon.  It was an area where silk workers lived, working in very poor conditions, and in which a number of workers’ uprisings occurred.  2 TN: Sartre first quotes this phrase at EN 49.  3 TN: Sartre has quoted the same phrase from Hegel earlier, at EN 53.  4 TN: In the philosophical tradition, the “freedom of indifference” is our power to select between alternative actions.  Descartes comments on this conception of freedom in his Meditations .  5 TN: Although Sartre gives no reference for this citation, Heidegger makes similarly worded claims in Being and Time and elsewhere.  Heidegger writes, for example, that “ Dasein ’s ‘Essence’ is grounded in its existence” (Heidegger 1980: §25).  6 Sartre’s note: Gaston Berger, Le Cogito chez Husserl et chez Descartes (1940).  TN: Sartre has got the title and date of publication wrong.  He must have intended to refer to Gaston Berger’s Le Cogito dans la Philosophie de Husserl , published in 1941 and translated into English as Berger (1972).  Gaston Berger (1896–1960) was a French philosopher.  7 TN: Sartre repeats this quotation a few times in the text.  The first instance is at EN 70.  8 TN: L’homme… n’est pas soi mais présence à soi.  Because I am translating the first soi as “itself” (see my note on pronouns in Notes on the Translation), the elegance of the French sentence is lost in English.  9 TN: Les Passions de l’Âme is the title of Descartes’s last-published treatise.  10 TN: The Greek word here is pathos .  11 TN:… le fuyard est dit ‘passionel’ et nous réservons l’épithète de ‘volontaire’ à l’homme qui résiste.  It is difficult to translate this sentence in a way that both sounds colloquial and retains the echo, in Sartre’s French, of the philosophical distinction between the passions and the will.  12 Sartre’s note: J.-P.  Sartre, Esquisse d’une Théorie Phénoménologique des Émotions (Hermann, 1939).  TN: This text is translated into English as Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions (Sartre 1994).  13 TN: On entend ordinairement par motif la raison d’un acte… For a reminder of why I have to use the word “reason” twice here, see my note on the mobile and motif vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  14 Sartre’s note: Ferdinand Lot, La Fin du Monde Antique et le Début du Moyen Âge , p.  35 (Renaissance du Livre, 1927).  TN: Ferdinand Lot (1866–1952) was a French historian.  The book to which Sartre refers was translated into English as Lot (1931); the quoted passage is at p.  32.  15 TN:… ou même qui l’intentionne… The verb “to intend” is not used here in the ordinary sense of “intending to do something” but in the technical phenomenological sense, where it means to take something as the intentional object of consciousness.  16 TN: I think Sartre has made a mistake here; the discussion of “motivations” comes earlier in Part Two.  17 TN:… au moins donne-t-il la raison de chacun… The word translated as “reason” here is raison , rather than motif .  18 TN: Sartre is alluding to a moment in the “Calypso” episode of Ulysses .  Joyce’s English differs slightly: Bloom is “seated calm above his rising smell” (Joyce 1960: 84).  19 TN:… “ne plus réaliser de presence…” Sartre is quoting here from Corbin’s translation of Heidegger (Heidegger 1938c: 140).  The passage appears in §50 of Being and Time .  20 Sartre’s note: Ibid., Part Two, Chapter 3.  21 TN: Sartre is clearly thinking here of Bergson (who is mentioned a couple of sentences later), although the term “psychologist” also suggests William James, whose work Sartre also knew.  Both Bergson and James claim “selection” to be a crucial function of consciousness.  22 Sartre’s note: Journal des Faux-Monnayeurs .  TN: The book referred to in Sartre’s note is the Journal (published in France in 1926), in which André Gide recorded the composition of his famous 1925 novel Les Faux-Monnayeurs .  The novel is translated into English as The Counterfeiters (Gide 1990).  23 TN:… la conception instantanéiste… As it is not really an English word, I have put this adjective in scare quotes.  It is extremely rare, also, to find it in French.  24 TN:… un élan initial… Sartre is almost certainly alluding here to Bergson’s ideas.  25 TN: Leibniz discusses the question of whether Adam could not have taken the apple in his correspondence with Arnauld, translated as Leibniz (1967).  26 TN: In Stoic philosophy “things indifferent” are indifferent from the moral point of view—for example, actions that are neither morally required nor morally prohibited.  27 TN: This is the Latin term for “golden mean.” The concept is best known for its role in Aristotle’s philosophy, where it represents the desirable middle way between two excessive extremes.  28 TN: Mindwertigkeit is the German word, used in Adler’s psychology, for “inferiority.” 29 TN: Philoctetes is the main character in Gide’s play Philoctète (1899), based on Sophocles’ Philoctetes .  30 TN: Raskolnikov is the main character in Dostoyevsky’s novel Crime and Punishment (translated as Dostoyevsky 1992).  31 TN: Sartre may intend the reader to associate the term comportement with Merleau-Ponty’s La Structure du Comportement , published in France in 1942, and translated into English as Merleau-Ponty (1963).  32 TN:… comme le sens de cette route… Sartre’s French makes a pun out of two meanings of the French word sens : “meaning” and “direction.” 33 TN:… se “donner du temps”… Sartre writes playfully here: the French phrase between his quotation marks is used in contexts where English speakers might say “spend time on it” or “give it some time.” 34 TN: Kant discusses our choice of “intelligible character” in his Critique of Pure Reason (Kant 1998: 536–545).  35 TN: Here again Sartre uses the verb passéifier .  36 TN: Sartre is paraphrasing the British philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–1626): “Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed.” 37 TN: Sartre is quoting from Descartes’s 1637 Discourse on Method : “My third maxim was to endeavor always to conquer myself rather than fortune, and change my desires rather than the order of the world.” Translated into English as Descartes (1911).  38 TN:… que le pour-soi était libre.  Perhaps Sartre uses the past tense here by mistake; he obviously does not mean to imply that the for-itself was free only in the past, and not also in the present.  39 TN: délaissés … Sartre seems to be using the French word délaissement (and cognates) to translate Heidegger’s German term Geworfenheit (which translates most literally into English as “thrownness”).  40 TN:… l’être brut du pour-soi.  I think this must be a mistake in the French text.  We should assume that Sartre meant “the brute being of the in-itself .” 41 TN: François Mauriac (1885–1970) was a famous French novelist.  He took the word querencia from his reading of Ernest Hemingway’s 1932 non-fiction book about bullfighting, Death in the Afternoon (Hemingway 2003).  42 TN: Heidegger gives this example in Being and Time (Heidegger 1980: §23).  43 TN: The institution Sartre refers to here is the École Navale, which trains naval officers.  The US counterpart would be the Naval Academy; the British equivalent would be the (Royal) Naval College.  44 TN: This is a version of “As you sow, so shall you reap.” 45 TN: Sartre has already quoted this phrase (from Hegel) earlier in the text, e.g., at EN 70.  46 TN:… à l’état de système isolé.  The concept of an “isolated system” comes from physics; in fact, in the natural world, it is impossible for a truly isolated system to exist.  47 TN: Sartre writes “ le futur… est… ce qui est laissé sur place.” Strictly, one would translate this as “the future is what is left behind ,” but, because Sartre may intend us to dwell on the term “place,” I have slightly varied the translation.  48 TN: Sartre is presumably alluding to the theory presented in Bergson (1911b).  49 Sartre’s note: Schlumberger, Un Homme Heureux (NRF).  TN: Jean Schlumberger (1877–1968) was a French writer.  His novel Un Homme Heureux (which translates as A Happy Man ) was published in France in 1920.  It is not available in English translation.  50 TN:… perpétuellement “en sursis.” See my note about the phrase en sursis , which derives I think from Heidegger, in Notes on the Translation.  51 TN: This phrase is in Aeschylus’s Agamemnon .  As Sartre says, it is also attributed to other Greek writers.  52 TN: Sartre has mentioned Kafka’s novel, The Trial , at EN 305.  Its French title, Le Procès , retains the intended connection with Sartre’s emphasis in this passage on process and proceedings .  53 TN:… en instance de liberté.  En instance is a legal phrase, used for ongoing actions such as divorce proceedings.  54 TN:… un “demi-solde”… This phrase, which literally means “someone on half-pay,” is often used in French to refer to retired or inactive soldiers receiving a pension for their earlier service.  55 TN:… fuite indéfinie… It is difficult to translate this sentence clearly.  I think the “flight” here refers to the “flight” (or passing) of time .  56 TN: This work by Bergson, published in France in 1896, is translated into English as Matter and Memory (Bergson 1911b).  57 TN: Umwelt is German for “environment” or “surroundings.” The term features in Heidegger’s Being and Time .  58 TN: There is obviously a mistake in the French text here, as there is no Chapter 4 in Part Two.  What Sartre goes on to say suggests he is indeed referring to material within Part Two, but I cannot be sure which precise section he had in mind.  59 TN: The French text says “ ne peut se choisir comme liberté ”: I think the word que has been accidentally omitted.  The square brackets around “only” indicate that this is my addition, made in the interest of sense.  60 Sartre’s note: We are simplifying here: there are influences and interferences between techniques, and the Arlberg method has for a long time been dominant in our country.  The reader will easily be able to restore to these matters their complexity.  61 TN:… “sera mis en moyenne ou en petite vitesse.” I do not know why Sartre places this phrase within quotation marks.  62 TN: Hendrik de Man (1885–1953) was a Belgian socialist and politician.  63 TN: Jean Paulhan (1884–1968) was a French writer and literary critic, whose most famous work is Les Fleurs de Tarbes , first published in 1936 (and translated into English as Paulhan 2006).  64 TN:… comprendre ce qu’il “veut dire”… There is a familiar translation difficulty here: the French phrase vouloir dire translates quite simply as “to mean” (in the sense of what one intends one’s words to mean), but Sartre’s pun on the phrase’s literal meaning (i.e., “to want to say”) gets lost in English.  65 TN:… que je voie la bonne mine et l’air soucieux… It seems likely there is a mistake in the French text here, and that Sartre’s intention was to describe Pierre as not looking well.  66 Sartre’s note: Brice Parain, Essai sur le Logos Platonicien .  TN: Brice Parain (1897–1971) was a French philosopher and essayist.  The book to which Sartre refers was published in 1942, and has not been translated into English.  67 Sartre’s note: I am simplifying: we can also learn what we think from our sentence.  But that is because it is possible, to a certain extent, to adopt the point of view of an Other in relation to it—exactly as we can in relation to our body.  68 TN:… si l’on découvre la “part du diable”… This expression (which translates literally as “the devil’s share”) refers to the unforeseen effects of human fallibility in our undertakings.  In this case, Sartre is thinking of the way our sentences may have unintended meanings.  Sartre may be associating this expression with the work of Denis de Rougemont (explicitly referred to earlier in Part Four), whose book La Part du Diable was published in France in 1942 and translated into English as The Devil’s Share (Rougemont 1944).  Alternatively, Sartre may be alluding to Gide, whose use of the same phrase is mentioned at EN 305.  69 TN: Le pour-soi, pour se choisir comme personne… This is one of those passages where, because Sartre is talking about the for-itself qua person , I have had to shift pronoun from “itself” to “himself.” I continue to switch between “itself” and “himself” in the following pages.  See my note on pronouns in Notes on the Translation.  70 Sartre’s note: We will see further on that the problem is more complex.  But these remarks suffice for now.  71 TN:… un monde où on prend sa droite… I use “one” here, as there is no explicit dialogue with Heidegger and in this instance it sounds better than “they.” 72 TN: Panzerdivisionen (German) is the name of the armored divisions used by the Germans in the Second World War.  73 Sartre’s note: Or of any other choice of my ends.  74 TN: Janus bifrons refers to the image of the two faces of the Roman god Janus, who is often depicted with two faces, one looking toward the past, the other toward the future.  75 Sartre’s note: Compare, for example, Morgan’s Platonism in Sparkenbroke .  TN: Charles Langbridge Morgan (1894–1958) was an English-born playwright and novelist.  Death is a major theme in his novel Sparkenbroke , first published in 1936, and translated into French in 1937.  76 TN: Rainer Maria Rilke (1875–1926) was an Austrian poet and novelist who published poems in French as well as German.  As Rilke’s themes include man’s loneliness, despair, etc., he is sometimes described as an “existentialist.” 77 TN: The Latin phrase translates literally as “the end to which,” and is used within English to mean “a final limiting point in time”—for example, to refer to the latest possible date for something.  78 TN: Malraux’s novel Les Conquérants (translated as Malraux 1991) was published in France in 1928 and describes the revolutionary struggle in China.  79 TN: Heidegger outlines Being-toward-death in Heidegger (1980: Division Two, chap.  1).  80 TN:… non l’amour en moi de “On”… My decision to translate Heidegger’s das Man (to which Sartre’s on corresponds) as “the they ” has meant I have had to slightly modify this sentence.  81 TN: Sartre refers to a well-known French nursery rhyme, “ Il était un petit navire ,” in which the starving sailors draw straws to decide which of them will be fed to the others.  82 TN: Sartre’s pun on attendre (“to wait for”) and s’attendre à (“to expect”) cannot be reproduced in English.  In fact the verb attendre can, by itself, mean both “to await something” and “to expect something”; Sartre exploits this ambiguity, which gets lost in translation, later in the same paragraph.  83 TN: Sartre makes an earlier reference to Meyerson at EN 172.  Meyerson uses the phrase “fibrous structure,” which he borrows from Arthur Balfour in his De l’Explication dans les Sciences (published in 1921, and translated as Meyerson 1991).  The idea is that the scientist draws out and investigates one “fiber” at a time from the complicated and tangled weave of the whole fabric of reality.  84 TN:… qu’elle est à venir à soi-même.  Once again, Sartre makes use of this pun.  85 TN: En tant que futur… l’avenir est… Here Sartre switches between two different French words for “future”: avenir and futur .  I do not think anything turns on this.  86 TN: Maurice Barrès (1862–1923) was a French novelist, journalist, and politician.  His collection of writings, Le Mystère en Pleine Lumière , was published in France in 1926.  I have not been able to find any English translation.  87 TN:… du type “en-soi, pour-soi.” I think there is an error in the French text here, and that the comma ought to be replaced by a hyphen.  88 TN: Les Chouans is an 1829 novel by French novelist and playwright Honoré de Balzac (1799–1850), translated as Balzac (1972).  89 TN:… ne saurait être ma possibilité propre… I translate propre as “ownmost” in order to echo the language used by Heidegger, whose characterization of death Sartre is opposing.  90 TN:… de mes attentes… A pun on the two meanings of the French word attente (“waiting” and “expectation”) is probably intended here: as the pun cannot be reproduced, I have added the second word to the sentence.  91 TN: Sartre has already referred to this novel at EN 147, EN 150 and EN 475.  92 TN:… à partir de l’autre.  Here “other” must be understood as “other person”; otherwise the sentence seems ungrammatical.  93 TN: The text only says la Convention , but the reference here is to the French National Convention (1792–1795).  94 TN: The German word Heimatlos literally means “homeless,” but is often used to refer to stateless people, such as some refugees.  95 TN:… “en ce combat douteux”… Sartre probably places this phrase in quotation marks to allude to the American writer John Steinbeck’s novel In Dubious Battle .  The novel, first published in 1936, appeared in French translation in 1940 with the title En un Combat Douteux .  Sartre took an interest in Steinbeck’s work, and more widely in contemporary American fiction.  96 TN: Sartre is quoting the Neo-Platonist philosopher Plotinus (204/5–270 CE).  97 TN: Heidegger’s phrase from Being and Time , Sein-zum-Tode , translates into English as “Being-toward-death.” 98 TN:… elle ne m’entame pas.  The verb entamer can mean “to start,” as well as “to dent” or “to make inroads into.” The point here is that my freedom is not limited by my death.  99 TN:… “libre pour mourir”… I am not sure why Sartre puts this phrase in quotation marks: probably he is alluding to (and repudiating) Heidegger’s notion of “freedom-toward-death” in Heidegger (1980).  100 TN:… par-dessus le marché.  I use “bargain” to match Sartre’s idiomatic French expression.  101 TN: Georges Politzer (1903–1942) was a French Marxist philosopher, of Hungarian origin, executed in 1942 by the Nazis.  The 1929 publication to which Sartre refers (not translated into English but whose title translates as The End of a Philosophical Parade ), was a polemical pamphlet, directed especially against Bergson, in which Politzer attacked the dominant French academic philosophy of the time for its abstraction and lack of engagement with contemporary historical and political circumstances.  102 TN: Sartre is referring to Franz Kafka’s parable “Before the Law” (“Vor dem Gesetz” in German).  This was published in self-standing form in Kafka’s lifetime, and subsequently formed part of his novel The Trial , which was published posthumously in 1925 (translated as Kafka 1994).  103 Sartre’s note: Cf.  the following chapter.  104 TN: This Latin phrase is often used in legal contexts; for example, in documents it means “must not be changed.” 105 Sartre’s note: J.  Romains, Les Hommes de Bonne Volonté : “Prélude à Verdun.” TN: Les Hommes de Bonne Volonté is the title of a series of novels by Jules Romains, including Prélude à Verdun (1937), which were published between 1932 and 1947 in France, and are translated into English as Romains (1933–1947).  Chapter 2: To Do and To Have 1 Sartre’s note: Paul Bourget, Essais de Psychologie Contemporaine: G.  Flaubert .  TN: This work was published in 1883, and has not been translated into English.  Paul Bourget (1852–1935) was an influential French novelist and cultural critic.  2 Sartre’s note: As Flaubert’s adolescence in fact does not show, as far as we know, anything particular in this respect, we have to suppose the influence of an unknown quantity of facts which, by definition, escape the critic.  3 TN:… elle est “compréhensible”… Sartre is alluding to Jaspers’s work Allgemeine Psychopathologie , translated into English as General Psychopathology (Jaspers 1963).  The German term for the capacity emphasized by Jaspers is Verstehen , which is normally translated into English as “understanding.” 4 TN: Sartre may have come across the notion of “compensatory delusion” through the work of the French psychiatrist Marcel Montassut (1897–1975), whose paper “Un Délire de Compensation” was published in 1924.  5 TN: This game (whose title is not usually translated into English) was a game played with a ball on a court, and a precursor of (indoor) tennis.  6 TN: Sartre is referring to Pascal’s observations, in his Pensées (Pascal 1995), of man’s need for “diversion” (as divertissement is usually translated into English).  7 TN: Sartre is referring to Stendhal’s famous 1822 essay De l’Amour , translated as On Love (Stendhal 2009).  8 TN: I have not been able to find sources for these quotations; in relation to the last phrase, Sartre may well have in mind the playwright Paul Claudel (who writes of Christ’s “filling an emptiness”).  9 TN: Sartre is referring again (as earlier in the text) to Kant’s doctrine here.  10 TN: Sartre is referring to Heidegger’s discussion of authenticity in Heidegger (1980).  11 TN:… “sensible au coeur”… Sartre is quoting from Pascal’s Pensées , where Pascal says that God is felt “by the heart,” and not through reason (Pascal 1995: §278).  12 TN: Sartre refers to the Stoic doctrine of “indifferents” at EN 515.  13 TN: Sartre’s earlier use of the phrase in quotation marks (at EN 582) makes it clear that he is alluding to Maurice Barrès.  14 TN:… joui… This is the first of two uses of jouir in the paragraph: in translating it as “to enjoy,” I have in mind the sense in which that verb can mean “to have,” as, for example, when we say someone “enjoys” good health.  As before, the reader should also bear in mind the sexual connotations of the French verb and noun.  15 TN: The French phrase volonté de puissance is used to translate Nietzsche’s concept Der Wille zur Macht , which is usually translated into English as “the will to power.” 16 TN:… les actes manqués… This French expression is normally used to translate Freud’s term “parapraxis” (or, in other English translations, “bungled acts”).  17 Sartre’s note: Esquisse d’une Théorie Phénoménologique des Émotions (Hermann, Paris, 1939).  TN: This text (whose French title Sartre gets slightly wrong here) is translated into English as Sartre (1994).  18 TN:… faire ce livre, faire cette promenade… Although “to do that book” sounds a little odd, I translate that way to signal Sartre’s repetition of the verb faire .  19 TN:… “nous devons toujours manifester”… I have not been able to trace this quotation ( verbatim ) to its alleged source in Gide’s writing.  However, in his diaries, Gide does characterize the purpose of a literary work as being “to manifest,” and he says the same about the role of the hero.  See for example Gide (2000: 8).  20 TN: La vue est jouissance… The term jouissance is often used to refer to sexual enjoyment (and orgasm in particular), and the rest of the sentence shows Sartre’s intention to exploit this connotation here.  As the English “enjoyment” lacks this connotation, the reader should bear the possible additional meaning in mind.  21 TN: The German title of Friedrich Schiller’s poem (1795) is “Das verschleierte Bild zu Sais.” 22 TN: Sartre is referring to the English seventeenth-century philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–1626), who discusses the myth of Pan in his “On the Wisdom of the Ancients” (Bacon 1985).  23 Sartre’s note: For a child, to know is effectively to eat.  He wants to taste what he can see.  24 TN: Hegel talks about desire destroying its object at Hegel (1977: §174).  I have not been able to find a source in Hegel for the equation between desire and eating mentioned by Sartre in the next sentence.  25 TN: I have added the quotation marks round this phrase, as it is rarely quoted in English.  Sartre is probably alluding to Spinoza (1632–1677), who uses the Latin distinction in his Ethics between natura naturans and natura naturata .  The former denotes nature’s self-causing activity, while the latter—“nature natured”—refers to nature understood as the passive effect of a causal chain.  26 TN:… les jeux proprement dits… Jeux , the French word for “games,” is the plural of jeu (the word for “play”) and related to the verb jouer (“to play”).  In order to approximate to Sartre’s point about the “strict sense of the word,” I have inserted the verb “to play” in the sentence.  27 Sartre’s note: See §3.  TN: I think Sartre is referring here to the next section of this chapter (section III).  28 TN: The “well-known” French phrase quoted by Sartre— “Glissez, mortels, n’appuyez pas” —is not well-known in English.  Sartre (2000) tells us in his autobiography Les Mots that his grandmother used to say this to him.  It comes from Pierre Charles Roy (1683–1764), who wrote: Sur un mince cristal l’hiver conduit leurs pas: Le précipice est sous la glace; Telle est de vos plaisirs la légère surface.  Glissez, mortels, n’appuyez pas.  I have borrowed Samuel Johnson’s English translation of the final line: “Thus lightly touch and quickly go.” 29 Sartre’s note: We looked at the relationship of movement to the for-itself in Part Three.  30 Sartre’s note: Apart from in the precise case where it simply is the desire to be : the desire to be happy, to be strong, etc.  31 TN: Sartre uses the French expression être à (“to belong to”) to convey the idea that the belongings are part of (the being of) their owners: I have had to approximate to this.  32 TN: Sartre is referring to the Malabar coast in southwest India, where sati was practiced.  The title of an eighteenth-century tragedy by the French playwright Antoine-Marin Lemierre (1733–1793), La Veuve du Malabar , may well have reminded Sartre of this location in particular.  33 TN: Sartre has referred to the Lares earlier in the text, at EN 145.  34 TN:… c’est être à… Again Sartre is exploiting the structure of this French phrase, used to attribute ownership.  35 TN: Posséder, c’est avoir à moi… Sartre continues to exploit this construction.  36 TN: Again, Sartre probably intends to connote sexual enjoyment here; note too that the verb consommer (which I translate as “to consume”) can also mean “to consummate.” 37 Sartre’s note: Brummell’s elegance consisted in only wearing clothes that were already quite worn-out.  He could not stand anything new: new things are like “clothes for Sunday,” because they belong to nobody.  38 TN: Again Sartre is alluding here to Stendhal’s account in On Love (2009).  39 TN: I am faithful to Sartre in reproducing the inept grammatical structure of this sentence.  40 TN: Gaston Bachelard (1884–1962) was a French philosopher, and a professor at the Sorbonne from 1940.  (Sartre’s reference to Bachelard’s lectures, some lines later, suggests that he had either attended these himself or knew someone who had.) L’Eau et les Rêves (translated as Bachelard 1983) was published in 1942.  41 Sartre’s note: Cf.  L’Imaginaire (NRF, 1940).  TN: Translated into English as Sartre (2004b).  42 Sartre’s note: We can also recall Daladier’s “melting currency.” TN: The French Radical politician Édouard Daladier (1884–1970) had championed a fiscal policy in the 1930s known as la monnaie fondante (usually translated as “softened currency”), according to which the value of unspent currency would diminish over time.  43 TN: Jacques Audiberti (1899–1965) was a French poet, playwright, and novelist.  44 Sartre’s note: A preference for a particular kind of animality; this is precisely what Scheler means by vital values .  45 TN: Sartre’s points here are in implicit disagreement with Bachelard, whose study of Lautréamont, focusing on the animal imagery in his poetry, was published in 1939.  46 Sartre’s note: Part Two, Chapter 3, section III.  47 TN: Sartre is quoting his own words almost verbatim from EN 223.  48 TN:… “un paysage est un état de l’âme”… Sartre probably takes this phrase from Henri Frédéric Amiel’s Journal Intime , translated into English as Amiel (1921), to which he refers elsewhere.  Amiel (1821–1881) was a Swiss philosopher, poet, and critic.  49 TN: Une poignée de main est visqueuse, un sourire… une pensée, un sentiment peuvent être visqueux.  It is odd even in French to describe these phenomena as “viscous.” The additional English adjectives (in square brackets) show what I think Sartre meant.  See my note on la viscosité in Notes on the Translation.  50 TN:… son caractère de ventouse qui m’aspire… In the old-fashioned medicine that Sartre has in mind, a ventouse (now mostly used to assist delivery in childbirth) has several uses, e.g., to extract poison, etc.  51 TN: Sartre probably knew about this primitive system of totem-based clans through Durkheim’s and Mauss’s research.  It is described in Durkheim and Mauss (2010).  52 TN: Sartre has referred earlier to these psychoses ( psychoses d’influence ) at EN 414.  53 Sartre’s note: We should note the importance of the opposite tendency, the tendency to bore holes, which would require on its own an existential analysis.  54 TN: Although Sartre writes “book ( livre ) III” in this sentence, he must mean Part Three.  Conclusion 1 TN: Sartre is referring to the passage in Plato’s Sophist at 266b16 (Plato 2015: 174).  NB: In some English translations “the Stranger” is called “the Visitor.” 2 TN: Here I follow Sartre’s inconsistent vacillation, in his discussion of Plato’s “Other,” between the upper and lower case for the first letter, and the definite article and its absence.  The term “other” in this discussion of Plato refers to “otherness” and is not to be confused with the Other, where Sartre uses this to refer to another person .  3 TN: Le sens du néant de la néantisation… The repetition in the French here gets lost in translation.  4 TN:… des uns et des autres… This French phrase is used to refer to a group of people.  As there is no exactly corresponding phrase in English, I have added the scare quotes.  5 TN: The two Greek expressions in this sentence mean “the all” ( to pan ) and “the whole” ( to holon ); these philosophical ideas derive from Parmenides.  6 TN:… “en dehors” de l’en-soi, rien… The scare quotes here are Sartre’s.  7 TN:… un reflet de ce rien… Sartre is referring here to the first-order reflection-reflecting structure, not to “reflection” as a cognitive act.  8 TN:… “cause de soi”… As the rest of the paragraph clarifies, Sartre translates from the Latin ens causa sui .  9 TN: Spinoza discusses this example at para 72 in his Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect , first published in 1677 and available in English translation in Spinoza (1985).  10 TN:… le réflexif avait à être le réfléchi et le réfléchi avait à être le réflexif.  I quote to identify the French verbs of reflection used in this very complicated passage.  11 TN:… le (reflet-reflétant) reflété se distinguait du (reflet-reflétant) reflétant… See my preceding note and the note on “reflection” vocabulary in Notes on the Translation.  12 TN: Sartre also uses the phrase ciel intelligible in EH (Sartre 1973), where he associates it with Plato.  He may have in mind Plato’s famous allegory of the Cave (in Republic ), from which the intelligible (eternal, etc.) can be seen only by looking outside and beyond the cave.  13 TN:… si elle se retourne sur cette valeur? In this context, se retourner implies a “review” or “revisiting” of something, as the following sentences make clear.  14 TN:… elle pourrait se vouloir elle-même… Although vouloir often means “to want” or “to wish,” it can also mean “to will.” I have chosen the latter here in order to echo Kant’s moral philosophy, with which Sartre is implicitly in dialogue here.  Cover Being and Nothingness Jean-Paul Sartre The Principle Text of Modern Existentialism Chapter 2: Temporality Chapter 2 GT142 TEMPORALITY I.  PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE THREE TEMPORAL DIMENSIONS Temporality is obviously an organized structure, and we should not conceive of the three so-called elements of time (past, present, and future) as a collection of “data” whose sum we are obliged to work out—for example, as an infinite series of “nows,” of which some are not yet, and others are no longer—but rather as structured moments within an original synthesis.  Otherwise we will encounter this paradox at the outset: the past is no longer, the future is not yet and, with respect to the instantaneous present, everyone knows that it has no being at all, and lies at the limit of an infinite division, as a dimensionless point.  In that way the entire series is annihilated and doubly so, since the future “now,” for example, is a nothingness insofar as it is future and it will be actualized as a nothingness when it passes into the state of a present “now.” The only possible method for studying temporality is to approach it as a totality that dominates its secondary structures, and confers their meaning on them.  We must never lose sight of this.  However, we cannot launch ourselves into an examination of the meaning of Time without a prior elucidation, through a preontological and phenomenological description, of the meaning of these three dimensions, which remains all too often obscure.  However, we must regard this phenomenological description as a provisional piece of work, whose aim is only to allow us access to an intuition of global temporality.  And, in particular, we must allow each of the dimensions we consider to appear against the ground of the temporal totality, while keeping constantly before our memory the dimension’s “ Unselbstständigkeit .” 1 (A) The past Any theory of memory presupposes something about the being of the past.  These presuppositions, which have never been elucidated, have obscured the problem of memory and, more generally, of temporality.  We must, therefore, raise the question once and for all: What is the being of a past being? Common sense oscillates between two equally vague conceptions: the past, it is said, no longer exists.  From this point of view, it seems, we want to attribute being only to the present.  This ontological assumption gave rise to the notorious theory of brain traces: since the past is no longer, and since it has collapsed into nothingness, if a memory continues to exist it must be in the capacity of a present modification of our being—for example, as a trace that is presently imprinted on a group of brain cells.  On this account, everything—the body, the present perception, and the past—is present in the form of a trace that is present in the body.  And everything is in actuality : because the trace’s existence is not virtual, insofar as it is a memory; it is an entirely actual trace.  If a memory is revived, it is in the present, and at the conclusion of a process occurring in the present, i.e., as a disruption of the protoplasmic equilibrium of the cellular group being investigated.  Psychophysiological parallelism, which is instantaneous and extratemporal, is at hand to explain how this physiological process is the correlative of a phenomenon that is strictly psychological but equally present: the appearance of the memory-image in consciousness.  The more recent concept of the engram achieves nothing further—other than adorning the theory with a pseudo-scientific terminology.  But if everything is present, how are we to explain the memory’s pastness , i.e., the fact that, in its intention, a memory-consciousness transcends the present to aim at the event, there where it was ? We have shown elsewhere that we will be unable to distinguish a perception from an image, if we start out by making the latter a renascent perception.  2 Here we encounter the same impossibility.  But in addition we have deprived ourselves of the means of distinguishing a memory from an image: neither the “weakness” of the memory, nor its pallor, nor its incompleteness, nor its contradictions with what is given in perception, can distinguish it from an image-fiction, since it presents the same characteristics; and these characteristics, moreover, being present qualities of the memory, cannot take us out of the present in order to direct us toward the past.  It is futile to invoke—as Claparède does—the memory’s participation in the self or its “me-ness” 3 or—as James does—its “intimacy.” 4 Either these characteristics are merely manifestations of a present atmosphere surrounding the memory, in which case they remain present and refer to the present, or they already relate to the past as such, but then they presuppose what we need to explain.  Some people believed we could easily get rid of the problem by equating recognition with a first attempt at localization, and the latter to a group of intellectual operations facilitated by the existence of “social frameworks of memory.” 5 It is beyond doubt that these operations exist, and they should be made the subject of a psychological study.  But if the relation to the past is not in some way given, these operations cannot create it.  In brief, if we begin by turning man into an islander, shut up in the instantaneous islet of his present, and if all his modes of being, the moment they appear, are essentially bound to a perpetual present, we will have radically deprived ourselves of any means of understanding man’s original relation to the past.  We will not succeed in constituting the dimension of the “past” out of elements borrowed exclusively from the present any more than the “geneticists” succeeded in constituting extension out of non-extended elements.  6 Moreover, popular consciousness finds it so hard to deny any real existence to the past that, at the same time as allowing this first thesis, it also allows another equally imprecise conception, according to which the past has a sort of honorary existence.  For an event to be past is, quite simply, for it to have entered retirement, to have lost its efficiency without losing its being.  Bergson’s philosophy took up this idea: in turning to the past, an event does not cease to be; it ceases to act, quite simply, but it remains “in its place,” at its date, for eternity.  We hereby restore being to the past, and rightly so: we even claim that duration is an interpenetrating multiplicity, and that the past continually organizes itself with the present.  7 But, even so, we have still not properly accounted for this organization and interpenetration: we have not explained how the past can “be reborn” and can haunt us or, to be concise, how it can exist for us .  If it is unconscious, as Bergson would have it, and if the unconscious is inactive, how can it insert itself into the fabric of our present consciousness? Does it have a power of its own? But is this power present, then, since it acts on the present? How can it emanate from the past as such? Should we reverse the question—like Husserl—and point to the play of “retentions” within our present consciousness, retentions that hook on to erstwhile acts of consciousness, maintaining them at their date and preventing them from vanishing? 8 But if Husserl’s cogito is given in the first instance as instantaneous, we will have no means of getting outside it.  We saw, in the last chapter, how protentions bump up in vain against the windowpanes of the present, without being able to break them.  The same thing happens with retentions.  Throughout his philosophical career, Husserl was haunted by the idea of transcendence and surpassing.  But the philosophical instruments at his disposal—and in particular his idealist conception of existence—deprived him of the means of accounting for this transcendence: his intentionality is only a caricature of it.  In reality, Husserl’s consciousness is unable to transcend itself: either toward the world, or toward the future, or toward the past.  Thus we have gained nothing by conceding being to the past because, according to the terms of this concession, it is obliged to be for us as if it had no being.  Whether the past is , as Bergson and Husserl would have it, or whether it is no longer , as Descartes wants to say, is hardly of importance if we have begun by cutting the bridges between it and our present.  If we give the present, as “presence to the world,” a privileged status, we are effectively adopting the perspective of intraworldly being to confront the problem of the past.  We imagine that we exist first as contemporaries of this chair or this table, and temporal meaning is pointed out to us by the world.  Now, if we place ourselves in the midst of the world, we lose all possibility of distinguishing between what is no longer and what is not .  Yet—it might be said—at least something that is no longer has been, whereas something that is not has no connection with being of any kind.  That is true.  But, as we have seen, we may describe the law that applies to the being of an intraworldly instant in these simple words: “Being is”—and these words designate a massive plenitude of positivity, in which nothing of what is not can be represented in any way whatsoever, not even by a trace, or a void, or a reminder, or a “hysteresis.” Being that is exhausts itself entirely in being; it has nothing to do with what is not, or with what is no longer.  No negation, whether it be radical or in the milder form of “no… longer,” can find any place within this absolute density.  Given that, the past may well exist in its way: all bridges have been broken.  Being has not even “forgotten” its past: that would still be a kind of connection.  The past has slipped away from it like a dream.  If we can treat Descartes’s and Bergson’s conceptions alike, dismissing both of them, it is because each of them is vulnerable to the same reproach.  Whether it is a question of destroying the past, or of preserving for it the type of existence of the Lares spirits, 9 these authors envisaged its fate separately , isolating it from the present: and, however they conceived of consciousness, they endowed it with the existence of the in-itself; they understood it as being what it was.  We have no reason to marvel, after this, at the fact that they fail to connect the past to the present, since conceived in this way the present is going to reject the past with all its strength.  If they had thought about the phenomenon of time in its totality, they would have seen that “my” past is in the first place mine , which is to say that it exists as a function of a specific being that I am .  The past is not nothing , nor is it the present; rather, its nature is to be connected, from its very source, to a specific present and a specific future.  The “me-ness” that Claparède talked of is not some subjective nuance that breaks into our memory: it is an ontological relation that unites the past with the present.  My past never appears in the isolation of its “pastness”: it would be absurd even to think it could exist like that; it is, from the outset, the past of this present.  This is what we need to elucidate first.  I write that Paul, in 1920, was a student at the École Polytechnique.  Who is the person who “was?” Paul, obviously—but which Paul? The young man in 1920? But the only tense of the verb “to be” that is appropriate for Paul—considered in 1920, and insofar as we attribute to him the property of being a Polytechnique student—is the present.  We ought to have said of him, as he was then: “he is.” If the Paul who was a student at the Polytechnique is now in the past, any relation with the present is severed: the man who supported that property—the subject—has remained back there, with that attribute, in 1920.  If we want an act of recollection to remain possible, we will be obliged, on this hypothesis, to allow that a recognitional synthesis could reach out from the present in order to maintain contact with the past.  It is impossible to conceive of such a synthesis other than as an original mode of being.  Without a hypothesis of this sort, we will be obliged to abandon the past in its superb isolation.  Moreover, what could such a split within the personality mean? Of course Proust allows for a plurality of successive “Mes,” but if we take this conception literally, we will fall back into the insurmountable difficulties encountered by the associationists in their time.  Perhaps the hypothesis of permanence within change will be suggested: the person who was a Polytechnique student is the same Paul who existed in 1920, and who exists now.  It is of him that, having said “he is a Polytechnique student,” we can now say “he is a former Polytechnique student.” But this appeal to permanence will not get us out of trouble: if nothing takes up the flow of “nows” in the other direction to constitute the time series and, within this series, some permanent characteristics, permanence will be nothing more than a specific instantaneous content, without any breadth, of each individual “now.” For something permanent there must be a past and, in addition, something or someone who was this past: rather than helping us to constitute time, permanence presupposes it, so that permanence can be disclosed within it, and, alongside it, change.  We come back, therefore, to the point we glimpsed earlier: if the existential persistence of being in the form of my past does not arise originally from my current present, and if yesterday’s past does not take the shape of a transcendence behind today’s present, we have lost any hope of connecting the past to the present.  If therefore I say, about Paul, that he has been a Polytechnique student or that he was one, 10 I am saying it about this Paul who is in the present, and about whom I can also say that he is in his forties.  The person who was at the Polytechnique is not the adolescent.  About that person, while he was there, we should say: he is .  It is the man in his forties who was the student.  To tell the truth, the man aged thirty was also that student.  But who would that man aged thirty be, in his turn, without the man in his forties who was once him? And as for the man in his forties, it is at the full height of his present that he “ was ” the Polytechnique student.  And, in the end, it is the “ Erlebnis ”—in its very being—whose mission it is to be a man in his forties, a man aged thirty, and an adolescent, in the mode of having-been him.  Today we say that this “ Erlebnis ” is : in their time we also said, about the man in his forties and the adolescent, that they are ; today they form part of the past, and the past itself is , in the sense in which at present it is Paul’s past, or the past of this “ Erlebnis .” Thus the beings that are designated by the particular forms of the perfect tense all really exist, although in various modes of being, but one of them is and, at the same time, was an other : the past is characterized as the past of something or someone; we have a past.  It is this implement, this society, and this man which have their past.  There is not first a universal past, which subsequently becomes particularized into concrete pasts.  But, on the contrary, what we find from the first instance is various pasts.  And the real problem—which we will approach in the following chapter—will be how to understand the process through which these individual pasts can be united, in order to form the past.  It will be objected, perhaps, that we have made things easy for ourselves by choosing an example where the subject who “was” still exists in the present.  Other cases may be cited.  For example, I can say of Pierre, who is dead, that “he liked music.” In this case both the subject and the attribute are in the past.  And there is no current Pierre to be the starting point from which this past-being could arise.  We agree about this.  We can even agree about it to the extent of recognizing that a taste for music has never been past for Pierre.  Pierre has always been the contemporary of this taste, which was his taste; his living personality has not survived him, and neither has he survived it.  It follows that, in this instance, what is past is Pierre-liking-music.  And I can raise the question that I raised just now: Of whom is this past-Pierre the past? It cannot be in relation to a universal Present which purely affirms being; it is, therefore, the past of my actuality.  And as a matter of fact Pierre has been for-me and I have been for-him.  As we will see, Pierre’s existence has affected me right to the core: while he was alive it formed part of a present “in-the-world, for-me and for-the-Other” that was my present—a present that I have been.  In this way, concrete objects that have disappeared are in the past, insofar as they form part of some survivor’s concrete past.  “The terrible thing about Death,” says Malraux, “is that it transforms life into Destiny.” 11 We should take this to mean that death reduces our for-itself-for-the-Other to the state of a mere being-for-the-Other.  Today I am the only one responsible, in my freedom, for the being of Pierre who is dead.  And those dead people who have not been rescued and carried aboard by some survivor’s concrete past are not in the past ; rather, they—and their pasts—have been annihilated.  There are therefore beings that “have” pasts.  We alluded just now, as if there were no difference between them, to an instrument, a society, and a man.  Were we right? Can we attribute an original past to all finite existents, or only to specific categories within them? To determine this, it will help to examine more closely the quite distinctive notion of “having” a past.  It is not possible “to have” a past in the way in which one might “have” a car or a racing stable.  In other words, the past cannot be possessed by a being in the present whose relation to it remains strictly external—in the way in which, for example, I remain external to my fountain pen.  In brief, in the sense in which “possession” normally expresses an external relation between possessor and possessed, this term is inadequate.  External relations would conceal an impassable gulf between past and present, which would be two de facto givens, without any real communication.  Even an absolute interpenetration of the present by the past, in the way Bergson conceives of it, will not resolve the difficulty, because this interpenetration, which is how the past is organized with the present, basically comes from the past and is no more than a relation of habitation .  It may well enable us to conceive of the past as being in the present, but we have deprived ourselves of any way of presenting this immanence other than by analogy with a stone at the bottom of a river.  The past may well haunt the present, but it cannot be the present; it is the present that is its past.  If therefore we study the relations of the past with the present by taking the past as our starting point, we will never be able to establish internal relations between them.  In consequence, an in-itself—whose present is what it is—cannot “have” any past.  The examples cited by Chevalier in support of his thesis and, in particular, the facts of hysteresis do not succeed in establishing that some matter’s past can act on its present state.  12 There is not a single one, in fact, that cannot be interpreted using the ordinary terms of mechanistic determinism.  One of these two nails, Chevalier tells us, has just been made and has never been used; the other has been twisted, and then straightened, by the blows of a hammer: they appear to be exactly the same.  However, at the first blow one of them sinks straight into the partition and the other becomes twisted again: the action of the past.  From our perspective, to see this as the action of the past requires some bad faith.  It is easy to substitute, for this unintelligible explanation of the being characterized by density, the only possible explanation: outwardly, these two nails have a similar appearance, but their present molecular structures are markedly different.  And the present molecular state is at each instant strictly the effect of the previous molecular state, which does not show, in the eyes of an expert, that there is a “passage” from one instant to another and that the past is permanent but merely that there is an irreversible connection between the contents of two instants of physical time.  To present the remanent magnetization of a piece of soft iron as proof of this permanence of the past is not to prove anything more serious: what we see here, in effect, is a phenomenon that survives its cause, and not a cause that subsists as a cause in its past state .  Long after the stone that pierced the water has reached the bottom of the pond, the concentric waves are still traveling across its surface: to explain this phenomenon, we do not appeal to any kind of action of the past: the mechanism is almost visible.  The facts of hysteresis or remanence do not seem to necessitate a different type of explanation.  Indeed, it is quite clear that the phrase “ to have a past”—which, when we apply it to matter, allows us to envisage a mode of possession in which the possessor may be passive, and which is not as such shocking—ought to be replaced by that of being one’s own past.  There is a past only for a present that cannot exist without being its past “over there,” behind it.  In other words, the only beings that have a past are those beings for whom there is a question, in their being, of their past being—beings that have their past to be .  These observations allow us to deny a priori any past to the in-itself (which does not mean, moreover, that we ought to confine it to the present).  We will not settle the question of the past of living things .  We will merely point out that, if we are required—as is far from certain—to attribute a past to life, this could only be subsequent to some proof that life’s being is such that it involves a past.  In short, one would first have to prove that living matter is something other than a physicochemical system.  The attempt to go in the opposite direction—which is what Chevalier does—and which consists in presenting the greater urgency of the past as constituting life’s originality, is a completely meaningless ὕστερον πρότερον.  13 The existence of a past is evident only for human-reality, because it has been established that it has to be what it is .  The past arrives in the world through the for-itself, because its “I am” takes the form of an “I am myself .” 14 What therefore is the meaning of “was?” First we can see that it is a transitive.  If I say “Paul is tired,” we can perhaps contest the copula’s ontological validity; we might perhaps wish to see it only as a sign of inherence.  But when we say “Paul was tired,” the essential meaning of the word “was” stares us in the face: Paul in the present is currently responsible for having had this fatigue in the past.  If he were not maintaining this fatigue with his being, his state would not even amount to something forgotten; rather, there would be a “no-longer-being,” strictly identical to a “not-being.” The fatigue would be lost .  The present being is therefore the foundation of its own past; and the “was” manifests this characteristic of being a foundation.  But we should not take this to mean that it founds its past indifferently, and without being profoundly modified by it: “was” means that the present being has to be in its being the foundation of its past by itself being this past.  What does this mean? How is the present able to be the past? The crux of the question lies obviously in the term “was,” which, acting as an intermediary between the present and the past, is itself neither wholly present nor wholly past.  Indeed it cannot be either one or the other, since, in that case, the tense that is supposed to denote its being would contain it.  The term “was” designates, therefore, the ontological leap from the present into the past and represents an original synthesis of these two modes of temporality.  How should we understand this synthesis? I see first that the term “was” is a mode of being.  In this sense I am my past.  I do not have it but I am it: what I am told in connection with an action I performed yesterday, or a mood that I had, does not leave me indifferent: I am wounded or flattered, I rear up or I let it be said, I am affected right to the core.  I do not dissociate myself from my past.  Of course, in the long run, I may attempt such a dissociation; I may assert that “I am no longer what I was,” and cite some change or some progress.  But that is a second reaction, and presents itself as such.  In denying any solidarity of being with my past, in relation to this or that particular point, I am affirming it for the whole of my life.  Ultimately, at the infinitesimal instant of my death, I will no longer be anything but my past.  It alone will define me.  That is what Sophocles means to express when, in The Trachiniae , he makes Deïanira say: “An old saying goes: ‘You can never know for sure whether a mortal’s life has been good or bad until his death.’ ” 15 It is also the meaning of the sentence from Malraux that we quoted earlier: “Death changes life into destiny.’ 16 Finally, it is what strikes the believer when he realizes with terror, at the moment of his death, that the bets are placed and he has only one card left to play.  Death reunites us with ourselves, as eternity has changed us into ourselves.  17 At the moment of death we are , which means we are helpless before the Other’s judgments: it is possible to decide what we are in truth ; we no longer have any chance of escaping the total sum that an all-knowing intelligence might calculate.  And if we repent at the eleventh hour, our repentance is wholly an attempt to crack open all the being that has slowly taken shape and solidified on us ; it is a final recoil in order to dissociate ourselves from what we are .  In vain: death freezes our recoil, along with the rest; it merely becomes combined with what has preceded it, as one factor among others, as one particular determination that can be understood only on the basis of the totality.  Through death, the for-itself changes for eternity into in-itself, to the extent to which it has entirely slipped into the past.  Thus the past is the ever-increasing totality of the in-itself that we are.  However, as long as we are not dead, the mode in which we are this in-itself is not that of identity.  We have it to be .  Usually resentment comes to an end with death, because the man has united with his past; he is it , yet without thereby being responsible for it.  While he is living, he is the object of my resentment, which means I blame him for his past not only insofar as he is it but insofar as in each moment he takes up that past again and maintains it in being, insofar as he is responsible for it.  It is not true that resentment freezes a man into what he was; if it did, it would survive his death.  Resentment is directed toward a living person who is in his being freely what he was.  I am my past and, if I were not my past, it would no longer exist—either for me or for anyone .  It would no longer have any relation to the present.  This certainly does not mean the past would have no being but only that its being would be undetectable.  I am the one through whom my past arrives in this world.  But we must be sure to understand that I do not give my past its being.  In other words, it does not exist in the capacity of “my” representation.  It is not because I “represent” my past that it exists.  Rather, it is because I am my past that it enters the world, and it is on the basis of its being-in-the-world that I can, by means of a specific psychological process, represent it to myself.  The past is what I have to be, yet it differs by nature from my possibles.  A possible—which is also something that I have to be—remains, as my concrete possible, something whose opposite is equally possible—although to a lesser degree.  The past, on the contrary, is without any possibility of any kind, something that has used its possibilities up.  What I have to be no longer depends in any way on my being-able-to-be; it is already in itself all that it can be.  I have to be the past that I am without any possibility of not being it.  I accept responsibility for it entirely, as if I could change it; and yet I cannot be anything other than it.  We will see later that we always retain the possibility of changing the past’s meaning , insofar as the past is an ex-present that has had a future .  But I am unable either to eliminate from or to add to the content of the past as such.  In other words, the past that I was is what it is; it is an in-itself, like the things in the world.  And the relation of being that I have to maintain with the past is a type of in-itself relation, i.e., a relation of identification with itself.  But, on the other hand, I am not my past.  Since I was it, I am not it.  The Other’s resentment still surprises and outrages me: How is it possible to hate the person that I was , in the person that I am ? Ancient wisdom placed great emphasis on this fact: I am unable to state anything about myself without it becoming false once I have stated it.  Hegel did not scorn the use of this argument.  Whatever I do, whatever I say, at the moment in which I will to be it, I have already been doing it, or been saying it.  But let us look at this aphorism more closely: it amounts to saying that any judgment that I make about myself is already false when I make it, which is to say I have become something else .  But how should we understand something else ? If we take it to mean a mode of human-reality possessing the same existential type as that whose present existence we are denying, it amounts to the claim that we have made a mistake in attributing the predicate to the subject, and that it remained possible to attribute another predicate: we should simply have aimed at it in the immediate future.  In the same way, a hunter who targets a bird where he sees it misses it—because the bird is no longer still at that place when the projectile reaches it.  He will hit it, on the contrary, if he aims slightly ahead, at a point which the flying creature has not yet reached.  If the bird is no longer at this place it is because it is already at another; in any case it is somewhere.  But, as we will see, this Eleatic conception of movement is profoundly mistaken: if we really can say that the arrow is in AB, then movement becomes a succession of unmoving items.  Similarly, if we conceive that there was an infinitesimal instant, which no longer exists, in which I was what I am no longer, we constitute me out of a series of frozen states that succeed each other like a magic lantern’s images.  If I am not it, it is not because of a slight interval between the judicative thought and being, because of a time-lag between judgment and fact; it is because in my immediate being, in the presence of my present, I am necessarily not it.  In brief, it is not because of some change—a becoming, conceived as a passing over into heterogeneity within being’s homogeneity—that I am not what I was; but, on the contrary, it is because my being is, necessarily, heterogeneous in relation to my ways of being.  To explain the world in terms of becoming, conceived as a synthesis of being and non-being, is easily done.  But has anyone considered that no being that becomes could be such a synthesis unless it were, in relation to itself, an act that founded its own nothingness? If I am already no longer what I was, I must still have it to be, in the unity of a nihilating synthesis that I myself maintain in being; otherwise I would have no relation of any kind with what I am no longer, and my full positivity would exclude the non-being that is essential to becoming.  Becoming cannot be given , as an immediate mode of being’s being, because, if we conceive of such a being, the being and non-being at its heart could only be juxtaposed, and no imposed or external structure can make one of them merge with the other.  Being’s connection with non-being can only be internal: non-being must arise within being as being; being must show up within non-being, and this cannot be a fact, or a natural law, but rather the emergence of the being that is its own nothingness of being.  If therefore I am not my own past, this cannot be in the original mode of becoming but rather insofar as I have it to be in order not to be it , and I have to not be it in order to be it .  This should illuminate the nature of the mode “was” for us: if I am not what I was, it is not because I have already changed—which would presuppose that time is already given—it is because I am, in relation to my being, in the mode of an internal connection with “ not-being .” Thus it is insofar as I am my past that I am able to not be it; my necessarily being my past is even the only possible foundation for the fact that I am not it.  Otherwise, in each instant, I would neither be it nor not be it, other than in the eyes of a strictly external witness who, moreover, would himself have to be his past in the mode of not-being .  These observations allow us to understand what is incorrect in the skepticism that began with Heraclitus, and whose main point is only that I am no longer what I say I am.  Of course, if we consider everything I can be said to be, I am not that.  But the assertion that “I am already no longer that” says it badly, because, if we take “that” to mean “being in itself,” I have never been that; and on the other hand it does not follow, either, that it would be an error for me to say I am that, since clearly I have to be that in order not to be that; that is what I am in the mode of “ was .” Thus, everything that we can say that I am —in the sense of being in itself, with full and compact density (he is quick-tempered, he is a civil servant, he is discontented)—is always my past .  It is in the past that I am what I am.  But, from another angle, this heavy fullness of being is behind me; there is an absolute distance that cuts it off from me and plants it out of my reach, out of contact, where it cannot adhere to me.  If I was or if I have been happy, it is because I am not happy.  But that does not mean that I am unhappy: merely that I can only be happy in the past.  It is not because I have a past that I carry my being behind me in this way: rather, the past is precisely only this ontological structure that obliges me to be what I am from-behind .  That is the meaning of “was.” By definition, the existence of the for-itself obliges it to accept its being, and it cannot be anything but for itself.  But, precisely, it can accept its being only by reclaiming that being—which places it at a distance from that being.  Even as I assert that I am in the mode of the in-itself, I escape this assertion, because in its very nature it implies a negation.  Thus the for-itself is always beyond what it is, by virtue of being it for-itself, and by virtue of having it to be.  But, at the same time, what remains behind it really is its being, and not another being.  In this way we can understand the meaning of “was,” which simply describes the for-itself’s type of being, i.e., the for-itself’s relation to its being.  The past is the in-itself that I am, insofar as I have surpassed it.  18 It remains for us to study the particular way the for-itself “was” its own past.  Now, we know that the for-itself appears in the original act through which the in-itself nihilates itself in order to found itself.  The for-itself is its own foundation insofar as it makes itself the failure of the in-itself, in order to be its own failure.  But it does not thereby manage to deliver itself from the in-itself.  The surpassed in-itself remains and haunts it, as its original contingency.  The for-itself can never make contact with it, or grasp itself as being this or that, but neither can it prevent itself from being, at a distance from itself, what it is.  This contingency, this heaviness that belongs to the for-itself at a distance, a heaviness that it never is but that it has to be as a heaviness that is surpassed, and preserved in its very surpassing, is facticity , but it is also the past.  “Facticity” and “the past” are two words to refer to one and the same thing.  In fact the Past, like Facticity, is the in-itself’s invulnerable contingency—what I have to be, without any possibility of not being it.  It is the inevitability of a factual necessity: inevitable not qua necessity but qua fact.  It is the de facto being that cannot determine the content of my motivations but whose contingency penetrates them, because they can neither remove it nor change it; rather, and on the contrary, my motivations must necessarily carry it along with them—in order to modify it—and they preserve it, in order to flee from it; it is what they have to be, even as they try to not be it, and it is the basis on which they make themselves what they are.  It is what explains how, in each instant, I am not a diplomat and sailor, and that I am a teacher—even though I can only perform this being, without ever being able to join it.  If I cannot return to the past, that is not because some magical power places it out of reach but simply because it is in-itself and I am for-myself; the past is what I am without being able to live it.  The past is substance.  In this sense, Descartes’s cogito ought to be reformulated as: “I think, therefore I was.” What misleads us is the apparent homogeneity of the past and the present.  For this shame that I experienced yesterday was—when I felt it—for-itself.  We believe therefore that it remains for-itself today and, from that, we wrongly conclude that, if I cannot return to it, that is because it is no longer .  But, to arrive at the truth, we need to reverse this relationship: there is an absolute heterogeneity between past and present, and if I cannot enter the past, that is because it is .  And the only way I could be it would be by being, myself, in-itself, in order to lose myself within it through an identification with it: and that is essentially denied to me.  In fact, the shame I felt yesterday—which was shame for itself—is still shame in the present and, on the basis of its essence, it might still be described as for-itself.  But in its being it is no longer for itself, because its form is no longer a reflection-reflecting.  Describable as for-itself, it quite simply is .  The past presents itself as for-itself that has become in-itself.  This shame, while I live it, is not what it is.  Now that I was it, I can say: it was a feeling of shame.  It has become what it was, behind me, with the permanence and the constancy of the in-itself; it is eternally at its date, and it has the total self-belonging of the in-itself.  In a sense, therefore, the past which is for-itself and in-itself at the same time resembles the value, or the “itself,” which we described in the previous chapter; in the same way, it represents a certain synthesis of the being that is what it is not and is not what it is, with the being that is what it is.  It is in this sense that we can talk about the past’s evanescent value.  That is why memory presents us with the being that we were with a fullness of being that bestows on it a kind of poetry.  By becoming frozen in the past, the pain that we had does not cease to present the meaning of a for-itself, and yet it exists within itself, with the silent fixity of someone else’s pain, of a statue’s pain.  It no longer needs to appear before itself to make itself exist.  It is, and its character as a for-itself—far from being the mode of being of its being—becomes on the contrary simply a way of being, a quality.  It is because they have contemplated the psyche in the past that psychologists have claimed consciousness was a quality that it might or might not possess, without modifying it in its being.  The past psyche is first , and it is for-itself afterward, in the way in which Pierre is blond, or this tree is an oak.  But precisely because of that, the past that resembles value is not value.  In the case of value, the for-itself becomes itself by surpassing and founding its being; the itself reclaims the in-itself; by virtue of this, the contingency of being gives way to necessity.  The past, on the contrary, is in the first instance in itself.  The for-itself is maintained in being by the in-itself, such that its raison d’être is no longer to be for-itself; it has become in-itself and accordingly it appears to us in its pure contingency.  There is no reason why our past should be this or that way: it appears, in the totality of its series, as a pure fact that we have to admit as a fact, as something gratuitous.  To sum up, it is an inversion of value, the for-itself reclaimed by the in-itself, thickened by the in-itself to the point at which it can no longer exist as a reflection for the reflecting, or as a reflecting for the reflection, but merely as an in-itself sign of the reflecting-reflection pair.  That is why the past can, at the extreme, be the object aimed at by a for-itself who wills to make value real and to flee from the anguish produced by the permanent absence of any “itself.” But in its essence it is radically distinct from value: it is the indicative from which precisely no imperative can be inferred, the distinctive fact of each for-itself, the contingent and unalterable fact that I was .  Thus the past is a for-itself seized back and drowned by the in-itself.  How can that happen? We have described the meaning of to-be-past in the case of an event, and the meaning of to have a past for a human-reality.  We have seen that the past is an ontological law of the for-itself, which means that, with respect to everything a for-itself may be, it must be it over there, behind itself, and out of reach.  In this sense, we can accept Hegel’s phrase: “ Wesen ist was gewesen ist.  ’ 19 My essence is in the past; that is the law of its being.  But we have not explained why a concrete event of the for-itself becomes past.  How does a for-itself that was its past become the past that a new for-itself has to be? To pass over into the past involves a modification of being.  What is this modification? To understand it, we must first of all grasp the present for-itself’s relation to being.  Thus, as we were able to foresee, the study of the past directs us to the study of the present.  (B) The present Unlike the past, which is in-itself, the present is for-itself.  What is its being? The present has its own antinomy: on the one hand, we readily describe it in terms of being : what is present is opposed to the future, which is not yet, and also to the past, which is no longer.  But, on the other hand, a strict analysis that aimed to rid the present of everything it is not—i.e., its immediate past and future—would in fact find nothing more than an infinitesimal instant, which is to say, as Husserl observes in his Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness , 20 the ideal term of an infinitely pursued division: a nothingness.  Thus, as on every occasion when we approach the study of human-reality from a new point of view, we find ourselves back with this indissoluble pair: Being and Nothingness.  What is the primary meaning of the present? Clearly, what distinguishes anything existing in the present from any other existence is its character of presence .  When the register is called, the soldier or the pupil replies “Present!” in the sense of “ adsum .” And the opposite of present can be absent , just as much as past .  Thus the meaning of present is “presence to…” We ought therefore to ask to what is the present a presence? And who is present? These questions will doubtless lead us now to elucidate the very being of the present.  My present is being present.  Present to what? To this table, to this bedroom, to Paris, to the world—in short, to being-in-itself.  But, inversely, is being-in-itself present to me , and to the rest of being-in-itself? If so, the present would be a reciprocal relation between presences.  But, as we can easily see, it is nothing of the kind.  Presence to… is an internal relation between the present being and the beings to which it is present.  In no case can it be a matter of a mere external relation of contiguity.  Presence to… means existence outside itself, alongside… Anything that can be present to… must be in its being such as to have within it a relationship of being with other beings.  I can be present to this chair only if I am unified with it in an ontological relation of synthesis, only if I am over there, in the being of this chair as not being this chair.  A being that is present to… cannot therefore repose “ in-itself ”; the in-itself cannot be present, any more than it can be past; it is , quite simply.  There can be no question of any one in-itself existing in some kind of simultaneity alongside another in-itself—other than from the point of view of a being who was co-present to the two in-itselfs, and who had its own capacity for presence.  Therefore the present can only be the for-itself’s presence to being-in-itself.  And this presence cannot be the outcome of some accident, of concomitance: on the contrary, any concomitance presupposes it, and presence must be an ontological structure of the for-itself.  This table must be present to this chair in a world haunted by human-reality in the form of a presence.  In other words, we cannot conceive of a type of existent that exists first as for-itself in order afterward to be present to being.  Rather, the for-itself makes itself present to being in making itself be for-itself, and it ceases to be presence when it ceases to be for-itself.  The for-itself’s presence to being defines it.  To which being does the for-itself make itself a presence? The answer is clear: the for-itself is present to being-in-itself as a whole.  Or rather the for-itself’s presence makes it the case that there is a totality of being-in-itself.  Indeed, by this very mode of presence to being in its capacity of being, any possibility of the for-itself being more present to some favored being than to other beings is set aside.  Even if the facticity of the for-itself’s existence means it is there —rather than elsewhere—to be there is not to be present .  Being-there only determines the perspective from which the presence to the totality of the in-itself takes place.  The for-itself thereby brings it about that the beings are for one same presence.  The beings are disclosed as co-present in a world in which the for-itself unites them with its own blood through the complete ecstatic sacrifice of itself that we know as “presence.” “Before” the for-itself’s sacrifice it would have been impossible to say any beings existed—either together or separately.  But the for-itself is the being through whom the present enters the world; effectively, worldly beings are co-present insofar as the same for-itself is present to them all at the same time.  Thus what we ordinarily describe as “present,” in the case of in-itself beings, is to be clearly distinguished from their being, even though it is nothing more : it is merely their co-presence insofar as a for-itself is present to them.  We know now who is present and to what the present is present.  But what is presence ? We have seen that it cannot be the pure coexistence of two existents, conceived as a mere relation of externality, because a third term would be required, in order to establish this coexistence.  This third term exists in the case of things’ coexistence in the midst of the world: what establishes their coexistence is the for-itself, as it makes itself co-present to all of them.  But in the case of the for-itself’s presence to being-in-itself, there can be no third term.  No witness—not even God—can establish this presence; even the for-itself cannot know it unless it already is .  Nonetheless, it cannot have the in-itself’s mode of being.  In other words, the for-itself is originarily presence to being insofar as it is its own witness of coexistence, in relation to itself.  How should we understand this? We know that the for-itself is the being whose existence takes the form of witnessing its own being.  Now the for-itself is present to being if it is intentionally directed outside itself on to that being.  And it has to stick as closely to being as possible, short of identification.  We will see in the following chapter that this adherence is realist, by virtue of the for-itself’s being born to itself in an original connection with being: it bears witness to itself of itself as not being that being.  And it is thereby outside itself—on being and in being—as not being this being.  Moreover, we can infer this from the very meaning of presence: our presence to any being implies that we are linked to that being by an internal connection; otherwise no link between the present and being would be possible.  But this internal connection is negative: it denies, with respect to a present being, that it is that being to which it is present.  Otherwise the internal connection would disappear into a straightforward identification.  Thus the for-itself’s presence to being implies that the for-itself bears witness to itself, in the presence of being, as not being that being: presence to being is the for-itself’s presence, insofar as it is not.  That is because the negation does not bear on a difference in a way of being—which might distinguish the for-itself from being—but on a difference in being.  We can express this concisely by saying that the present is not .  What does this non-being of the present and of the for-itself mean? To grasp this we must return to the for-itself, to its mode of existing, and briefly sketch a description of its ontological relationship to being.  We can never say of the for-itself as such that it is , in the sense in which, for example, we can say: “It is nine o’clock,” which is to say in the sense of being’s total self-adequation, which posits and eliminates the “itself,” and offers the outward appearance of passivity.  For this reason, the for-itself exists as an appearance, paired with a witness of a reflection, and the reflection refers to a reflecting, without there being any object whose reflection could be the reflection.  The for-itself does not have being because its being is always at a distance: over there, in the reflecting, if you are considering the appearance, which is an appearance or reflection only for the reflecting; over there, in the reflection, if you are considering the reflecting which, in itself, is purely the function of reflecting this reflection.  But in addition, the for-itself, taken by itself, is not being—because it explicitly makes itself be for-itself as not being being.  It is consciousness of… as the inner negation of… The basic structure of intentionality and of ipseity is negation, as an internal relation of the for-itself to a thing; the for-itself is constituted outside itself, on the basis of the thing, as the negation of that thing; in this way, its first relationship with being in itself is negation; it “is” in the mode of the for-itself, i.e., as an existent which, insofar as it is revealed to itself as not being being, is dispersed.  It doubly escapes being, through its inner disintegration and through its explicit negation.  And the present is precisely this negation of being, this escape from being insofar as being is there , as what we escape from.  The for-itself is present to being in the form of flight; the present is a constant flight in the face of being.  Thus we have clarified the primary meaning of the present: the present is not ; the present instant comes from a reifying and actualizing conception of the for-itself; this conception leads to the practice of denoting the for-itself by means of what is , and of what it is present to—for example, by this hand on the dial.  In this sense, it would be absurd to say that, for the for-itself, it is nine o’clock; rather, the for-itself can be present to a hand that points at nine o’clock.  What we incorrectly refer to as “the present” is the being to which the present is presence.  It is impossible to grasp the present in the form of an instant, because the instant would have to be the moment at which the present is .  Yet the present is not; it is presentified in the form of flight.  21 But the present is not only the for-itself’s presentifying non-being.  As for-itself, it has its being outside, in front of and behind itself.  Behind it, it was its past; and in front of it, it will be its future.  It is the flight out of co-present being and away from the being that it was, toward the being that it will be.  As present, it is not what it is (past) and it is what it is not (future).  We are hereby directed to the Future.  (C) The future Let us note first that the in-itself cannot be the future, and nor can it contain any part of the future.  When I look at this crescent moon, the full moon is in the future only “within the world” that is disclosed to human-reality: it is through human-reality that the future arrives in the world.  In itself, this quarter of the moon is what it is.  Nothing is in it as potentiality.  It is in actuality.  As a phenomenon of being-in-itself’s original temporality, therefore, there is no future—any more than there is a past.  If the in-itself’s future existed, it would exist in-itself , cut off from being like the past.  Even were we to accept, as Laplace does, 22 a complete determinism that would enable us to predict a future state, this future circumstance would still need to be profiled against an antecedent disclosure of the future as such, a being-to-come of the world—otherwise time must be an illusion and chronology disguises a strictly logical order of deducibility.  If the future can be seen in profile at the world’s horizon, that can only be by means of a being that is its own future, i.e., which is “forth-coming” to itself, whose being is constituted by a coming-to-itself of its being.  23 Here, again, we encounter ecstatic structures that are analogous to those we described for the past.  Only a being who has to be its being, rather than merely being it, can have a future.  But what exactly is it to be one’s future? And which type of being possesses a future? We must, from the outset, abandon the idea that the future exists in the form of representation .  First of all, it is rare for the future to be “represented.” And when it is—as Heidegger says—it is thematized and it ceases to be my future in order to become the indifferent object of my representation.  And further, even if the future were represented, it could not be the “content” of my representation because that content, if there was one, would have to be present.  Might it be said that a “futurizing” intention can animate this present content? That would make no sense.  If such an intention even existed, it would be necessary for it to be present itself—in which case the problem of the future is impossible to solve—or, otherwise, for it to transcend the present into the future, and in that case the intention’s being is “to come” and we are obliged to recognize that the being of the future differs from the mere percipi .  24 If moreover the for-itself was confined within the present, how could it represent the future? How could it know it or foresee it? No manufactured idea can provide an equivalent of it.  If at first we have confined the present within the present, it goes without saying that it will never get out of it.  It is no use to describe it as “pregnant with the future.” 25 Either this expression means nothing, or it designates an actual, efficient power of the present, or it points to the law of the for-itself’s being, as being future in relation to itself and—in this last case—it only highlights what we need to describe and explain.  The for-itself can neither be “pregnant with the future,” nor an “awaiting of the future,” nor “knowledge of the future,” except against the ground of an original and prejudicative relation of the self to itself: we cannot conceive of the for-itself possessing the slightest possibility of any thematic prediction—not even of the determined states of the scientific universe—unless it is the being that, on the basis of its future, returns to itself, the being that makes itself exist as having its being outside itself, in the future.  Let us take a simple example: this position which I keenly take up on the court has meaning only through the movement I will make next, with my racket, to send the ball back over the net.  But I am obeying neither my “clear representation” of the future movement, nor my “firm resolution” to accomplish it.  Representations and acts of will are idols invented by psychologists.  It is my future movement which, without even being thematically presented, turns backward to the positions I adopt, in order to illuminate, to connect and to modify them.  From the outset I am, all at the same time, over there and on this court, as a lack in myself, and returning the ball, and the intermediate positions I adopt are only means for bringing me closer to this future state in order to merge within it, each of whose full meaning is given only through this future state.  There is not a moment of my consciousness that is not similarly defined by an internal relation to a future; whether I write, I smoke, I drink, or I rest, the meaning of my acts of consciousness is always at a distance, over there, outside.  In this sense Heidegger is right to say Dasein is “always infinitely more than what it would be if we limited it to its pure present.” 26 Better still, such limitation is impossible, because we would thereby make the present into an in-itself.  It was, therefore, correct to claim that finality is causality in reverse, which is to say the efficient power of a future state.  But we forget too often to take this sentence literally.  We should not understand the future as a “now” that is not yet.  We would fall back into the in-itself and, above all, we would be obliged to envisage time as a given and static container.  The future is what I have to be insofar as I cannot not be it.  Recall that the for-itself, confronted with being, presentifies itself as not being that being, and as having been its being in the past.  This presence is flight.  What we have here is not a delayed presence, resting now alongside being, but rather an escape out of being and toward… And it is a twofold flight, because, in fleeing from the being that it is not, presence flees from the being that it was.  What does it flee toward? Let us not forget that the for-itself, insofar as it presentifies itself to being in order to flee from it, is a lack.  The Possible is what is missing from the for-itself for it to be itself or, alternatively, the appearance—at a distance—of what I am.  From this we can grasp the meaning of the flight involved in presence: it is a flight toward its being , which is to say toward the “itself” that it would become by coinciding with what is missing from it.  The future is the lack that, as a lack, separates it from the in-itself of presence.  If nothing were missing from it, it would fall back within being and would lose even its presence to being , in order to acquire in exchange the isolation of complete identity.  The lack, as such, allows it to be presence; it is because it is outside itself, and directed toward a missing item beyond the world, that it is able to be outside itself, as presence to an in-itself that it is not.  The future is the determining being that the for-itself has to be, beyond being.  There is a future because the for-itself has its being to be—rather than straightforwardly being it.  As for the being that the for-itself has to be, it cannot be in the same way as the co-present in-itselfs, or it would be without having to be been; we must not, therefore, picture it as a completely defined state, from which only presence is missing, in the way in which, for Kant, existence adds nothing more to the object of a concept.  But neither can it not exist; otherwise the for-itself would only be a given .  It is what the for-itself makes itself be, as it constantly grasps itself for itself as incomplete in relation to it.  It is what haunts the reflecting-reflection pair from a distance, and explains why the reflecting grasps the reflection (and vice versa ) as a Not-yet.  But this missing item must, precisely, arise alongside the for-itself that is missing something in the unity of a single event, or there would be nothing in relation to which the for-itself could grasp itself as not-yet.  The future was revealed to the for-itself as what the for-itself is not yet, insofar as the for-itself constitutes itself non-thetically for itself—within the perspective of this revelation—as a not-yet, and insofar as it makes itself be as a project of itself out of the present toward what it is not yet.  And, of course, there can be no future without this revelation.  And this revelation itself demands to be revealed to itself, which is to say that it demands the for-itself’s revelation to itself; otherwise the whole structure—Revelation, revealed—would fall into the unconscious, i.e., into the in-itself.  Thus only a being that is what it reveals to itself—i.e., whose being is in question for itself—can have a future.  But conversely, such a being can be for itself only within the perspective of a not-yet, because it grasps itself as a nothingness, i.e., as a being whose complement of being is at a distance from it.  “At a distance”—or, in other words, beyond being.  In this way, the future is all that the for-itself is, beyond being.  What does “beyond” mean? To grasp this, we must note that the future has one of the for-itself’s essential characteristics: it is (future) presence to being.  And it is the presence of this for-itself here—of the for-itself whose future it is.  When I say “ I will be happy,” it is this present for-itself that will be happy; it is the current “ Erlebnis ,” with all that it was , dragging it behind it.  And it will be happy as presence to being, i.e., as the for-itself’s future presence to a co-future being.  So what is given to me as the meaning of the present for-itself is, in the ordinary case, co-future being, insofar as that will be disclosed to the future for-itself as what the for-itself will be present to.  This is because the for-itself is thetically conscious of the world in the form of presence, and not thetically conscious of itself.  Thus what is usually disclosed to consciousness is the future world , without consciousness noticing that it is the world as it will appear to a consciousness, the world as it is posited in the future, by the presence of a for-itself to come.  This world has meaning as a future world only insofar as I am present to it as another who I will be , in another position physically, affectively, socially, etc.  However, he lies at the other end of my present for-itself, and beyond being-in-itself, and that is why we tend to present the future in the first place as a state of the world, and to have ourselves appear subsequently against this worldly ground.  If I am writing, I am conscious of the words as written, or as having to be written.  The words alone seem to be the future awaiting me.  But the mere fact that they appear as to be written implies that my writing, as my non-thetic consciousness (of) self, is the possibility that I am.  In this way the future, as a for-itself’s future presence to a being, drags the in-itself into the future with it.  This being, to which it will be present, is the meaning of the in-itself that is co-present to the present for-itself, just as the future is the meaning of the for-itself.  The future is presence to a co-future being because the for-itself can exist only outside itself, alongside being, and the future is a future for-itself.  But in this way, through this future, a future arrives in the world, 27 which means the for-itself is its meaning as presence to a being that is beyond being.  Through the for-itself a “beyond” to being is disclosed, alongside which it has to be what it is.  I must, according to the famous phrase, “become what I was,” 28 but I must become it within a world that has itself become , and within a world that has become on the basis of what it is.  In other words, I give the world its particular possibilities on the basis of the state in which I grasp it: determinism appears against the ground of the futurizing project of myself.  In this way, we can distinguish the future from the imaginary—where I am, equally, what I am not, and where, equally, I find my meaning in a being that I have to be, but where this for-itself that I have to be emerges from the depths of the world’s nihilation, beside the world of being.  But the future is not solely the for-itself’s presence to a being situated beyond being.  It is something awaiting the for-itself that I am.  This something is myself: when I say that I will be happy, it is clearly understood that it is my present self, dragging its past after it, who will be happy.  Thus the future is myself insofar as I await myself as present to a being beyond being.  I project myself toward the future in order to merge with what is missing from me, i.e., with that which, synthetically added to the present, would make it the case that I am what I am.  Thus, what the for-itself has to be, in the form of presence to being beyond being, is its own possibility.  The future is the ideal point at which the infinite and sudden compression of facticity (Past), of the for-itself (Present) and of its possible (Future) will finally allow the Itself to arise as the in itself existence of the for-itself.  And the for-itself’s project toward the future that it is is a project toward the in-itself.  In this sense, the for-itself has its future to be, because it can only be the foundation of what it is by being ahead of itself and beyond being: the for-itself is, in its very nature, obliged to be “a hollow that is always future.” 29 So it will never have become , in the present, what it had to be, in the future.  The present for-itself’s future falls—as a future—entirely into the past, along with this for-itself itself.  It will be a specific for-itself’s past future, or the future perfect.  30 This future is not actualized .  What is actualized is a for-itself designated as the future, and constituting itself in connection with this future.  For example, my final position on the court determined—from the depths of the future—all my intermediate positions, and in the end it was joined by a final position identical to what it had been in the future, as the meaning of my movements.  But this “joining” is, precisely, purely ideal, and not a real operation: the future does not allow us to join it; it slides into the past as a former future, and the present for-itself is disclosed in all its facticity as the foundation of its own nothingness and, once again, as lacking a new future.  Hence comes that ontological disappointment that awaits the for-itself each time it reaches a future: “How wonderful the Republic was, under the Empire!” 31 Even if my present is strictly identical in content to the future beyond being toward which I was projecting myself, it is not this present that I was projecting myself toward, because I was projecting myself toward the future as the future, i.e., as the point at which I would join up with my being, as the place where the Itself would arise.  We are in a better position, now, to question the future about its being, since this future that I have to be is simply the possibility of my presence to being beyond being.  In this sense, the future is thoroughly opposed to the past.  It is true that the past is, in effect, the being that I am outside myself—but it is the being that I am without any possibility of not being it.  That is what we called being one’s past behind oneself.  The future that I have to be, on the contrary, is in its being such that I only can be it, because my freedom eats away at its being from below.  In consequence, the future constitutes the meaning of my present for-itself, as the project of its possibility, but it does not at all predetermine my for-itself to come, since the for-itself is forever abandoned in that nihilating obligation to be the foundation of its nothingness.  The future only drafts in advance the framework in which the for-itself will make itself be as a presentifying flight to being, and toward another future.  The future is what I would be if I were not free, and what I can have to be only because I am free.  At the same time as it appears at the horizon, in order to acquaint me with what I am, on the basis of what I will be (“What are you doing?” “I am in the middle of nailing this carpet, of hanging this picture on the wall”), its nature as a future present-for-itself disarms it, since the mode in which the for-itself will be will be that of determining itself to be, and since the future—once it has become a past future, as the preliminary draft of this for-itself—can only request it, in its capacity as past, to be what it makes itself be.  In brief, I am my future within the constant perspective of the possibility of not being it.  Hence comes that anguish, described earlier, which stems from my not sufficiently being this future that I have to be, and which gives my present its meaning: because I am a being whose meaning is always problematic.  The for-itself may wish to be chained to its possible—as if to the being that lies outside itself but which, at least, lies surely outside itself—but in vain: the for-itself can only ever be its future problematically, because it is separated from it by the nothingness that it is.  In brief, the for-itself is free, and its freedom sets its own limit to itself.  To be free is to be condemned to be free.  Thus the future, insofar as it is future, has no being.  It is not in itself and nor does it have the for-itself’s mode of being either, since it is the for-itself’s meaning .  The future is not; it possibilizes itself.  The future is the continual possibilization of possibles, as the present for-itself’s meaning, insofar as this meaning is problematic and—as such—radically escapes the present for-itself.  The future, thus described, does not correspond to a homogeneous and chronologically ordered succession of instants to come.  Of course, my possibles lie within a hierarchy.  But this hierarchy does not correspond to the order of universal temporality, as it becomes established on the basis of original temporality.  I am an infinity of possibilities, because the for-itself’s meaning is complex and cannot be contained within a formula.  But one possibility may do more to determine the meaning of the present for-itself than another one, which is closer in universal time.  For example, this possibility of going at two o’clock to see a friend whom I have not seen for two years really is a possible that I am .  But the possibles that are closer—possibilities of going there by taxi, bus, metro, on foot—remain at present undetermined.  I am not any of these possibilities.  Thus, within the series of my possibilities, there are holes.  At the level of knowledge, these holes will be filled in by the constitution of a homogeneous time without any lacunae and, at the level of action, by my will, i.e., through my rational and thematizing choice, in accordance with my possibles, of possibilities that are not and never will be my possibilities, and that I will actualize in the mode of complete indifference in order to join up with a possible that I am.  II.  THE ONTOLOGY OF TEMPORALITY (A) Static temporality Our phenomenological description of the three temporal ecstases ought now to allow us to address temporality, as a totalizing structure within which the secondary ecstatic structures are organized.  But this new study must be carried out from two different points of view.  Temporality is often thought to be indefinable.  Yet everyone will admit that it is above all a succession.  And we can define the succession, in turn, as an order, whose ordering principle is the before-after relation.  A multiplicity ordered in terms of “before” and “after”: such is temporal multiplicity.  We can begin, therefore, by considering the constitution and the requirements of the terms “ before ” and “ after .” Let us call this the temporal “ static ,” since these notions of “before” and “after” may be considered strictly in their ordinal aspect, and independently of any change in the literal sense.  But time is not only a fixed order for a determinate multiplicity: if we observe temporality more carefully, we will note the fact of succession—i.e., the fact that a particular “after” becomes a “before,” that the present becomes the past, and that the future becomes the future perfect.  This is what we should examine in second place, calling it the temporal “ Dynamic .” Doubtless, the secret of the static constitution of time should be sought within the temporal dynamic.  But it is preferable to separate out the difficulties.  Indeed, in one sense, we can say that the temporal static may be considered on its own, as a particular formal structure of temporality—what Kant calls the order of time—and that the dynamic corresponds to the material flowing or—in accordance with Kant’s terminology—the course of time.  32 It will be profitable, therefore, to consider this order, and this course, successively.  The “before-after” order is defined in the first place by its irreversibility.  We call a series “successive” if its terms can only be considered one by one, and in only one direction.  But many people have wanted to see the before and the after as forms of separation—precisely because the terms of the series are disclosed one by one , and because each of them excludes the others.  And indeed time really does separate me, for example, from the actualization of my desires.  If I am obliged to wait for their actualization, that is because it is situated after other events.  Without the succession of “afters” I could be what I want to be straightaway , and there would no longer be any distance between me and myself, or any separation between an action and a dream.  It is essentially this separating power of time that has been emphasized by novelists and poets, as well as a related idea (which, in fact, belongs to the temporal dynamic): that any “now” is destined to become an “erstwhile.” Time eats away at things, and hollows out; it separates, and flees.  And, still in its capacity as something that separates—by separating man from his affliction, or from the object of his affliction—time heals.  “Leave all to time,” says the king to Don Rodrigo.  33 More generally, what strikes us especially is the necessity, to which all being is subject, of being split into an infinite dispersion of successive afters .  Even permanent things, even this table, which remains invariable while I change, must extend and refract its being within the dispersion of time.  Time separates me from myself, from what I have been, from what I want to be, from what I want to do, from things, and from the Other.  And we choose time as a practical measure of distance: we are half an hour away from this town, an hour away from this other one, it will take three days to finish this work, etc.  It follows from these premises that a temporal outlook on man and the world must collapse into the fragmentation of before and after.  The unit of this fragmentation—the temporal atom—will be the instant , whose place is before some determinate instants and after other instants, without including either the “before” or the “after” within its own form.  The instant cannot be split and, since temporality is a succession, it is timeless; 34 but the world collapses into an infinite dust of instants, and poses the problem (for Descartes, for example) of knowing how there can be any transition from one instant to another: because the instants are juxtaposed, i.e., separated by nothing , and yet there is no communication between them.  Similarly, Proust wonders how his “Me” is able to pass from one instant to another; he wonders how, for example, after a night of sleep, he can rediscover precisely his “Me” from the night before, rather than any other.  And the empiricists, more radically, having denied any permanence to the Self, tried in vain to establish an appearance of transversal unity running through the instants of psychological life.  Thus, when we consider in isolation temporality’s power to dissolve, we are forced to admit that the fact of having existed at any given instant does not constitute the right to exist at the following instant, nor even a mortgage or an option on the future.  And now the problem is to explain how there can be a world, i.e., instances of interconnected changes, and of permanence within time.  However, temporality is not solely, or even in the first place, separation.  To appreciate this, we need only consider the notion of “before” and “after” more precisely.  We said that A is after B.  We have thereby established between A and B an explicit relation of order , which presupposes therefore their unification within that very order.  If there were no other relation between A and B than this one, that would at least still be enough to assure their connection, for the relation allows us to move in thought from one to the other, and to unite them within a judgment of succession.  If therefore time is separation, it is at least a separation of a special type: a division, which reunites.  So be it—one might say—but this unifying relation is an external relation par excellence .  When the associationists wanted to establish that impressions within the mind were bound with each other only by purely external connections, were they not ultimately reducing all associative connections to the before-after relation, conceived in terms of mere “contiguity?” Without doubt.  But didn’t Kant show that a unity of experience was required and thereby the unification of the temporal manifold, in order for the slightest empirical associative connection even to be conceivable? Let us consider the theory of associationism more closely.  Accompanying it is a monist conception of being, as being everywhere being-in-itself.  Every impression in the mind is, in itself, what it is, isolated in its present plenitude; no trace of the future is involved, no lack.  Hume, when he issues his famous challenge, was concerned to establish this law, which he claims to derive from experience: we may inspect an impression, strong or weak, as we wish, but we will never find anything in it but itself, so that any connection between an antecedent and a consequent, however constant it may be, remains unintelligible.  Let us suppose, therefore, some temporal content A, existing as a being in itself, and a later temporal content B, existing in the same way, i.e., in the self-belonging of identity.  We must note from the outset that this self-identity obliges each of them to exist without any separation at all from itself—not even temporal separation—and hence to exist in eternity or in the instant: these amount to the same thing, since the instant, not being internally defined by the “before-after” connection, is timeless.  Given these conditions, we can ask: How can state A come before state B? It will be of no use to reply that it is not the states that are earlier or later but rather the instants that contain them, because these instants are, ex hypothesi , in itself , like the states.  Now, A’s anteriority in relation to B presupposes in A’s very nature (as an instant or a state) an incompleteness which points toward B.  If A is earlier than B, it is because A is able to acquire this determination in B .  If not, it will be impossible for B, isolated within its instant, to confer upon A—isolated within its own—the slightest specific quality, either as it arises or in its annihilation.  In brief, if A is to be earlier than B, it must in its very being be in B , as its future.  And conversely, if B is to be later than A, it must lag behind itself, in A, which confers its meaning of posteriority upon it.  If therefore we concede being in itself a priori to A and B, it is impossible to establish the slightest connection of succession between them.  Such a connection would in effect be a purely external relation and, as such, we would have to accept its remaining up in the air, deprived of any substrate, and unable to bite either on A or on B, within a sort of timeless nothingness.  There remains the possibility that this before-after relation can exist only for a witness who establishes it.  Only, if this witness can be in A and in B at the same time , it is because he is himself temporal, and then the problem arises again, in relation to him.  Or else, on the contrary, he can transcend time by means of the gift of temporal ubiquity, which is equivalent to timelessness.  This solution was settled on, in the same way, by Descartes and Kant: for them, the temporal unity within which the synthetic before-after relation is disclosed is conferred upon the multiplicity of instants by a being which itself escapes from temporality.  Both of them set out by assuming that time is the form of division, a time which itself dissolves into pure multiplicity.  As the unity of time cannot be provided by time itself, they burden an extratemporal being with this task: God, and his continuous creation, in Descartes; the I think , and its forms of synthetic unity, in Kant.  Only, in Descartes’s case, what unifies time is its material content, which is maintained in existence through a constant creation ex nihilo , while in Kant’s case—on the contrary—the concepts of pure understanding are applied to the form of time.  In any case, something timeless (God, or the I think ) is responsible for providing timeless beings (the instants) with their temporality.  Temporality becomes a mere external and abstract relation between timeless substances: the aim is to reconstruct it entirely out of a-temporal materials.  Evidently, no reconstruction like this, made from the outset against time, can subsequently lead us to the temporal.  Either we are—implicitly and surreptitiously—temporalizing the timeless or else, if we scrupulously protect its timelessness, time will become a pure human illusion, a dream.  Indeed, if time is real , then God has to “wait until the sugar melts”; he must be over there, in the future, and yesterday, in the past, in order to work the connection between moments, because it is necessary for him to go and find them where they are.  35 In this way, God’s pseudo-timelessness masks other concepts, that of temporal infinity and temporal ubiquity.  But these can have meaning only for a synthetic form of self-separation—which no longer corresponds in any way to being in itself.  If, on the contrary, we make God’s omniscience, for example, rest on his extratemporality, he will not need to wait for the sugar to melt to see that it will melt.  But, in that case, the necessity of waiting—and, in consequence, temporality—can only represent an illusion resulting from human finitude, and the chronological order becomes nothing but the confused perception of a logical and eternal order.  The argument can be applied without modification to Kant’s “I think.” And it would be pointless to object that, in Kant’s view, time has a unity as such, since it arises from timelessness as an a priori form—because our problem is not so much that of accounting for time’s total unity as it arises but rather the intratemporal connections of “before” and “after.” Should we invoke a virtual temporality, which the unification actualizes? But this virtual succession is even less comprehensible than the real succession we talked about earlier.  What kind of succession awaits its unification in order to become a succession? To whom, or to what, does it belong? And yet, if that succession was not already given somewhere, how could something timeless secrete it, without losing all its timelessness within it? How could succession even emanate from timelessness without shattering it? Moreover, the very idea of unification used here is absolutely incomprehensible.  In effect, we are presupposing two in-itselfs, isolated in their place and at their time.  How can they be unified? Is this unification real ? In that case, either we are just engaging in empty talk—and the unification has no purchase on two in-itselfs, isolated in their respective identities and completeness—or we have to constitute a unity of a new type, which is precisely ecstatic unity: each state will be outside itself, over there, in order to be before or after the other.  Only that will require us to shatter their being, to decompress it: in short, to temporalize it, and not merely bring them closer.  Now, how could the timeless unity of the I think , as a mere faculty of thought, be able to operate this decompression in being? Should we say the unification is virtual , i.e., that a type of unity has been projected beyond the impressions, somewhat like Husserl’s noema ? But how can a timeless being, having to unify timeless elements, conceive of the kind of unification that belongs to succession? And if—as we would need to agree in that case—the esse of time is a percipi , how will the percipitur 36 be constituted? In short, how could a being with an a-temporal structure apprehend any in-itselfs—isolated in their timelessness—as temporal, or enable them to be intended as such? Thus, insofar as it is at the same time a form of separation and a form of synthesis, temporality will not permit us either to derive it from something timeless or to impose it from outside on timeless things.  Leibniz, reacting against Descartes, and Bergson, reacting against Kant, wanted in turn to view temporality as nothing more than a pure relation of immanence and cohesion.  Leibniz regards the problem of the transition from one instant to the other and its solution—continuous creation—as a false problem with a pointless solution: according to him, Descartes forgot time’s continuity .  In asserting time’s continuity, we deny ourselves any conception of it as formed out of instants and, if there are no longer any instants, there is no longer any before-after relation between the instants.  Time is a vast, continuous flowing, to which it is impossible to assign elements whose existence is antecedent and in-itself.  But this is to forget that the before-after is also a form that separates.  If time is a given continuity with an undeniable tendency toward separation, we can raise Descartes’s question in a different form: What is the source of continuity’s cohesive power? Of course, there are no initial elements that are juxtaposed within the continuous.  But that is precisely because it is from the outset a unification.  As Kant says, it is because I draw a straight line that the straight line, actualized within the unity of a single act, is something other than an infinite line of dots.  Who, therefore, draws time? In short, this continuity is a fact that must be accounted for; it cannot be a solution.  We should recall moreover Poincaré’s famous definition: a series a, b, c , he says, is continuous when a = b, b = c, a ÷ c.  37 This is an excellent definition, just because it allows us to anticipate a type of being that is what it is not, and is not what it is: by virtue of an axiom, a = c ; by virtue of the continuity itself, a ÷ c .  Thus a is, and is not, equivalent to c .  And b , which is equal to a and equal to c , differs from itself, insofar as a is not equal to c .  But as long as we consider it from the perspective of the in-itself, this ingenious definition remains a mere flight of fancy.  And if it provides us with a type of being that is and—at the same time—is not, it does not provide us with its principles, or its foundation.  Everything remains to be done.  In the study of temporality in particular, we can appreciate how useful continuity is, by intercalating between an instant a and an instant c —however close they may be—an intermediate b such that, as in the formula a = b, b = c, a ÷ c , b is at the same time indiscernible from a and indiscernible from c , which are absolutely discernible from each other.  This will actualize the before-after relation, and provide an element able to come before itself—insofar as it is indiscernible from a and from c .  Splendid! But how can such a being exist? What is the source of its ecstatic nature? How is it that the splitting that we can see beginning within it never comes to an end? Why does it not explode into two terms, of which one merges with a and the other with c ? How can we fail to see that its unity poses a problem? Perhaps a more thorough examination of this being’s conditions of possibility would have taught us that only the for-itself could exist in that way, in the ecstatic unity of itself.  But it is precisely this examination that has not been attempted, and Leibniz’s temporal cohesion hides in its depths the cohesion of absolute immanence which belongs to logic, i.e., identity.  But if the chronological order is continuous, then, precisely, it cannot be symbolized by the order of identity, because continuity is not compatible with identity.  In the same way, Bergson, with his duration as a melodic organization and interpenetrating multiplicity, does not seem to see that an organization of multiplicity presupposes some organizing act.  He is right, against Descartes, to eliminate the instant ; but Kant is right to oppose him, by asserting that no synthesis is given .  This Bergsonian past, adhering to the present and even penetrating it, is hardly more than a figure of rhetoric.  And this is clearly displayed by the difficulties encountered by Bergson with his theory of memory.  For if the past, as he asserts, lacks agency, it can only remain behind; it can never return to penetrate the present in the form of a memory, unless some present being has taken on the additional task of existing ecstatically in the past.  And of course, in Bergson’s theory, it is definitely one single being that endures.  But that is just what makes us feel in need of ontological clarifications, because we do not know if, in the end, it is being that endures, or duration that is being.  And if duration is being, then we must be told the ontological structure of duration; and if, on the contrary, it is being that endures, we must be shown what, in its being, enables it to endure.  What may we conclude, at the end of this discussion? In the first place, this: temporality is a force that dissolves, but it does so within an act of unification; it is not so much a real multiplicity—which could not subsequently receive any unity and could not, in consequence, even exist in the form of multiplicity—as a quasi-multiplicity, the first draft of a dissociation within unity.  We must not try to envisage either of these two aspects on its own: if we start by positing temporal unity, we are at risk of no longer even being able to understand anything about the irreversible succession as the meaning of this unity; but if we regard the disaggregating succession as time’s primordial character, we are at risk of no longer even being able to understand that there is one time.  If therefore there is no priority, either of unity over multiplicity or of multiplicity over unity, we must conceive of temporality as a unity that multiplies itself , which means temporality can be only a relation of being within that same being.  We cannot envisage it as a container whose being is given , because that would mean giving up forever any understanding of how this being in-itself can fragment itself into multiplicity, or how the in-itself of the most minimal containers—or instants—can be gathered into the unity of one time.  Temporality is not .  Only a being with a specific structure of being can, in the unity of its being, be temporal.  “Before” and “after” are intelligible, we noted, only as an internal relation.  It is over there, in the “after,” that the before becomes determined as “before” and conversely.  In brief, the “before” is intelligible only as being what is before itself.  In other words, temporality can only designate the mode of being of a being that is, itself, outside itself.  Temporality must have the structure of ipseity.  In effect, it is only because the itself is itself over there, and outside itself, in its being, that it can be before or after itself—and, in general, that there can be any before and an after.  Temporality can exist only as the internal structure of a being that has its being to be, i.e., as the for-itself’s internal structure.  It is not that the for-itself has any ontological priority over temporality.  Rather, temporality is the for-itself’s being insofar as the for-itself has it ecstatically to be.  Temporality is not; rather the for-itself, in existing, temporalizes itself.  Conversely, our phenomenological study of the Past, the Present, and the Future allows us to show that the for-itself cannot be, unless its form is temporal.  In arising within being as the nihilation of the in-itself, the for-itself constitutes itself in every possible dimension of nihilation at the same time.  From whichever angle we consider it, it is the being that is only held together by a thread or, more precisely, the being that, in being, makes every possible dimension of its nihilation exist.  In the Ancient world, the term “diaspora” referred to the profound cohesion and dispersion of the Jewish people.  We can make use of this word to refer to the for-itself’s mode of being: it is diasporic.  Being-in-itself has only one dimension of being, but the appearance of nothingness, as that which is been , at the heart of being complicates the existential structure, by causing the ontological mirage of the Itself to appear.  We will see later that reflection, transcendence and being-in-the-world, and being-for-the-Other represent several dimensions of nihilation or, alternatively, several original relations of being with itself.  Nothingness, therefore, introduces a quasi-multiplicity within being.  This quasi-multiplicity is the foundation of every multiplicity within the world, because multiplicity presupposes an initial unity, within which the multiplicity takes shape.  In this sense it is not true, as Meyerson claims, that diversity is a scandal and that reality is to be held responsible for this scandal.  38 The in-itself is not diverse, it is not a multiplicity, and, in order for it to take on multiplicity as a characteristic of its being-in-the-midst-of-the-world, it is necessary for a being to arise that is simultaneously present to each in-itself isolated in its identity.  It is through human-reality that multiplicity comes to the world; the quasi-multiplicity within being-for-itself enables number to be disclosed within the world.  But what do these multiple, or quasi-multiple, dimensions of the for-itself mean? They are its various relations to its being.  When one is, quite simply, what one is, there is only one way of being one’s being.  But as soon as one is no longer one’s being, various ways of being it—even while not being it—simultaneously arise.  If we confine ourselves to the primary ecstases—those which show the original meaning of the nihilation and, at the same time, represent the least nihilation—the for-itself can and must at the same time: (1) not be what it is; (2) be what it is not; (3) within the unity of a constant referral, be what it is not and not be what it is.  Here we encounter three ecstatic dimensions, where the meaning of “ecstasis” is distance from itself.  It is impossible to conceive of a consciousness that does not exist in these three dimensions.  And if the cogito encounters one of them first, that does not mean that it is the first but merely that it is more easily disclosed.  But, taken alone, it is an “ unselbstständig ” 39 that immediately allows the other dimensions to be seen.  The for-itself is a being that must exist in all its dimensions at the same time.  Here distance —understood as distance from itself—is nothing real, nothing that might in some general way be , as in itself: it is merely the nothing, the nothingness that “ is been ” as separation.  Each dimension is one way of projecting ourselves, in vain, toward the Itself, of being what one is beyond a nothingness; each dimension is a different way of being this wilting of being, or this frustration of being, that the for-itself has to be.  Let us consider each of them separately.  In the first dimension, the for-itself has its being to be behind it, as what it is without being its foundation.  Its being is there, up against it, but separated from it by a nothingness—the nothingness of facticity.  The for-itself as the foundation of its nothingness—and, as such, necessary—is separated from its original contingency insofar as it is unable either to remove it or to merge into it.  It is for itself, but its mode is irremediable and gratuitous.  Its being is for itself, but it is not for this being—precisely because such reciprocity in the reflection-reflecting would make the original contingency of what is disappear.  Precisely because the for-itself grasps itself in the form of being, it is at a distance—as if the reflection-reflecting activity had leaked into the in-itself, where the reflecting was no longer made to exist by the reflecting, nor the reflecting by the reflection.  In consequence, the being that the for-itself has to be is given as something to which we can never return, precisely because the for-itself cannot found it in the mode of reflection-reflecting but insofar as it can only found the connection between this being and itself.  The for-itself does not found the being of this being but merely the fact that this being can be given .  This is a matter of unconditional necessity: whichever for-itself we consider, it is in some way; it is, since we can name it, since we can assert or deny that it has various features.  But insofar as it is for-itself, it is never what it is.  What it is lies behind it, as constantly surpassed .  And this surpassed facticity is exactly what we call “the past.” The past is, therefore, a necessary structure of the for-itself, because the for-itself can exist only as a nihilating surpassing, and this surpassing implies a surpassed.  It is therefore impossible, at any moment in which we consider a for-itself, to grasp it as not-yet-having a past.  We should not believe that the for-itself exists first, and arises in the world with the absolute newness of a being without any past, in order to constitute its past afterward, bit by bit.  But, regardless of the for-itself’s elevation in the world, it enters the world in the ecstatic unity of a relation with its past: there is no absolute beginning that, without having a past, becomes a past; rather, as the for-itself, insofar as it is for-itself, has to be its past, it enters the world with a past.  These remarks allow us to consider the problem of birth in a rather new light.  In effect, it strikes us as scandalous that consciousness should at some moment “appear,” and should come “to inhabit” the embryo or, in short, that there should be one moment in which the living thing, as it develops, lacks any consciousness and another moment in which a consciousness without any past becomes imprisoned within it.  But the scandal is over once it appears that there can be no consciousness without a past.  That does not mean, however, that any consciousness presupposes some earlier consciousness, frozen into the in-itself.  This relation between the present for-itself and the for-itself that has become in-itself conceals the primitive relation of pastness, which is a relation of the for-itself to the pure in-itself.  In point of fact, it is as the nihilation of the in-itself that the for-itself arises, and it is through this absolute event that the past is constituted as such, as the for-itself’s original and nihilating relation to the in-itself.  The for-itself’s being is originally constituted by this relation to a being that is not consciousness, existing within the complete night of identity, 40 that the for-itself is, however, obliged to be, outside itself, behind itself.  With this being—to which the for-itself cannot in any case be brought back , and in relation to which the for-itself is represented as absolutely new—the for-itself feels a deep solidarity of being, which shows up in the word “before”: the in-itself is what the for-itself was before .  In consequence, it makes perfect sense that our past does not appear to us as if it were limited by a clean line, with no smudges—which is what would happen if consciousness were able to spring up in the world before having a past—but that, on the contrary, it becomes lost within a progressive darkening, all the way back into shadows that, however, we still are; we can appreciate the ontological meaning of our shocking solidarity with the fetus, a solidarity that we are able neither to deny nor to understand.  Because, after all, this fetus was me: it represents the de facto limit of my memory, but not the de jure limit of my past.  There is a metaphysical problem about birth, to the extent that I can be concerned to know how I came to be born from that embryo—and perhaps that problem is insoluble.  But there is no ontological problem: we do not have to ask ourselves how a consciousness can be born, because consciousness can appear to itself only as the nihilation of in-itself, i.e., as having already been born .  As an ecstatic relation to the in-itself that it is not, and as the a priori constitution of pastness, birth is a law that governs the for-itself’s being.  To be for-itself is to be born .  But there is no need, thereafter, to raise metaphysical questions about the in-itself from which the for-itself is born such as: “How was there an in-itself before the for-itself’s birth?,” “How is the for-itself born from this in-itself, rather than from that other one?,” etc.  None of these questions takes any account of the fact that it is through the for-itself that the past in general can exist.  If a before exists, it is because the for-itself has arisen within the world, and it is on the basis of the for-itself that it can be established.  To the extent to which the in-itself is made co-present to the for-itself a world appears, replacing the isolated instances of in-itself.  And, in this world, designation becomes possible, and we can say: this object here , that object there .  In this sense, insofar as the for-itself, in arising to being, makes a world of co-presences exist, it also makes its “before” appear as co-present to some in-itselfs in a world or—alternatively—in a state of the world that has passed.  So, in one sense, the for-itself appears as being born from the world, because the in-itself from which it is born lies in the midst of the world, as a past co-present among past co-presents: a for-itself who was not there before is born, and arises in the world, and on the basis of the world.  But, in another sense, the for-itself is what allows a “before” to exist quite generally and, within this “before,” some co-presents that are united within the unity of a past world in such a way that we can designate one or the other of them by saying: “ this object.” Universal time does not exist first , in which a for-itself that does not as yet possess any past might suddenly appear.  But it is on the basis of birth —as an original and a priori law of being of the for-itself—that a world with a universal time is disclosed, within which we can designate a moment at which the for-itself was not yet there, and a moment at which it appears, beings from which it was not born and a being from which it was born.  Birth is where the absolute relation of pastness arises, as the for-itself’s ecstatic being in the in-itself.  Through it, a Past of the World appears.  We will return to this.  For now it will suffice to note that consciousness or the for-itself is a being that arises in being beyond something irreparable that it is—and that this irreparable element, insofar as it lies behind the for-itself, in the midst of the world, is the past.  The past as the irreparable being that I have to be, without any possibility of not being it, does not lie within the “reflection-reflecting” unity of the “ Erlebnis ”: it is outside.  However, it is not what I am conscious of either—in the sense, for example, in which the perceived chair is what I am perceptually conscious of.  In the case of my perception of the chair, a thesis is involved, i.e., an apprehension and affirmation of the chair as the in-itself that my consciousness is not.  What my consciousness has to be, in the for-itself’s mode of being, is not-being-the-chair.  This is because, as we will see, its “not-being-the-chair” takes the form of a consciousness (of) not-being, i.e., an appearance of not-being, for a witness who is there only to testify to this non-being.  The negation is therefore explicit and constitutes the connection of being between the perceived object and the for-itself.  The for-itself is nothing more than this translucent nothing , as the negation of the perceived thing.  But although the past is outside , the connection here is not of the same type, because the for-itself is given as being the past.  There cannot, therefore, be any thesis of the past, because we can only posit what we are not.  Thus, in perceiving an object, the for-itself accepts for itself its not being the object, whereas, in disclosing the past, the for-itself accepts its being the past, and is separated from it only by its nature as a for-itself, incapable of being anything.  Thus there is no thesis of the past, and yet the past is not immanent in relation to the for-itself.  It haunts the for-itself at the very moment when the for-itself accepts itself as not being this or that particular thing.  What the for-itself looks at is not the object.  The for-itself’s gaze, translucent in itself, is directed beyond the thing, and toward the future.  The past, as a thing that one is without positing it, as something that haunts the for-itself without being noticed, lies behind it, and outside its thematic field, which lies before it, as what it illuminates.  The past is “posited against” the for-itself, and accepted as what it has to be, without being able to be affirmed, or denied, or thematized, or absorbed by it.  Of course, it is not true that the past cannot ever be the object of a thesis for me, or even that it is not often thematized.  But in that case it is the object of an explicit investigation, where the for-itself affirms itself as not being this past that it posits.  The past is no longer behind ; it does not cease to be past, but I myself cease to be it: in my primary mode I was my past without knowing it (but not without being conscious of it); in the secondary mode I know my past, but without any longer being it.  How is it possible—one might ask—for me to be conscious of my past other than in the mode of a thesis? Yet the past is constantly there : it is the very meaning of the object I look at and have already seen, of the familiar faces that surround me; it is the beginning of this movement presently being pursued, a movement I would be unable to describe as circular had I not myself been the witness, in the past, of its beginning; it is the origin and springboard of all my actions, and the constantly given breadth of the world that allows me to orient and locate myself; it is myself insofar as I live myself as a person (the Ego is also structured by what is to come); in short, it is my contingent and gratuitous connection to the world and to myself, insofar as I continually live these, as utterly abandoned.  The psychologists call this knowledge .  But in addition to the fact that, even by using this term, they “psychologize” it, they deprive themselves of any means of accounting for it.  For our knowledge is everywhere, and conditions everything, even memory: in short, knowledge is presupposed by intellectual memory, and what is their “knowledge”—if we take that to mean some present fact—other than an intellectual memory? This supple, pervasive, and changing knowledge, which forms the texture of all our thoughts and is composed—without any image, words, or thesis—of a thousand empty indications, a thousand designations discernible behind us, is my concrete past insofar as I was it, insofar as it is the irreparable background-depth of all my thoughts and all my feelings.  In its second dimension of nihilation, the for-itself grasps itself as a certain lack.  It is this lack and it is also the missing item , because it has to be what it is.  To drink, or to be drinking: that means to have never finished drinking, or to have still to be drinking, beyond the drinking that I am.  And when “I have finished drinking,” I have drunk : the whole structure slides into the past.  In currently drinking I am, therefore, this drinking that I have to be and that I am not; any designation of myself will escape from me into the past, if it has to be heavy and full, if it must have the density of something identical.  If it makes contact with me in the present, it is because it stretches itself into the Not-yet, because it designates me as an incomplete totality that is unable to make itself complete.  The for-itself’s nihilating freedom eats into this Not-yet.  It is not only being-at-a-distance; it is a dwindling of being.  Here the for-itself—which was, in the first dimension of nihilation, in front of itself—is behind itself.  In front of or behind itself: never itself .  That is the very meaning of the two ecstases, the Past, the Future, and that is why value in itself is, in its nature, self-repose—timelessness! The eternity that man seeks is not the infinity of duration, that futile chasing after itself for which I myself am responsible: it is self-repose, the atemporality of absolute self-coincidence.  Finally, in the third dimension, the for-itself—dispersed within the constant play of the reflected-reflecting—escapes from itself, in the unity of a single flight.  Here being is everywhere and nowhere: wherever we try to grasp it, it stands before us; it has escaped.  This back-and-forth within the for-itself is Presence to being.  Present, past, and future at the same time , and dispersing its being in three dimensions, the for-itself is, by the mere fact of nihilating itself, temporal.  None of these dimensions has ontological priority over the others, and none of them can exist without the other two.  Nonetheless, the emphasis should still be placed on the present ecstasis—unlike Heidegger, who emphasizes the future ecstasis—because it is as a revelation to itself that the for-itself is its past, as what it has to-be-for-itself in a nihilating surpassing, and it is as a revelation to itself that it is a lack and haunted by its future, i.e., by what it is for itself over there, at a distance.  The present is not ontologically “prior” to the past and the future—it is just as conditioned by them as it conditions them—but it is the cavity of non-being that is indispensable to the total synthetic form of temporality.  Thus temporality is not a universal time that contains all beings, and human-realities in particular.  Nor is it a law of development imposing itself on being from outside.  Nor is it being; rather, it is the internal structure of the being that is its own nihilation, i.e., the mode of being that belongs to being-for-itself.  The for-itself is the being that has to be its being in the diasporic form of temporality.  (B) The temporal dynamic The fact that the for-itself arises necessarily in conformity with the three dimensions of temporality teaches us nothing about the problem of duration , which comes under the temporal dynamic.  At first sight, the problem appears twofold: Why does the for-itself undergo this modification of its being, through which it becomes past? And why does a new for-itself arise ex nihilo in order to become the present of that past? This problem was concealed for a long time by a conception of human being as in-itself .  It is the crux of Kant’s refutation of Berkeley’s idealism, and it is a favorite argument in Leibniz that, by itself, change implies permanence.  Given that, if we assume that a certain atemporal permanence remains through time, temporality is reduced to being no more than the measure and order of change.  Without change there would be no temporality, since time can have no purchase on the permanent and identical.  If, moreover, change itself is presented—as in Leibniz—as the logical analysis of a relation of consequences to premises, i.e., as the development of a permanent subject’s attributes, then there is no real temporality anymore.  But this conception is based on many mistakes.  First of all, the subsistence of some permanent element alongside something changing cannot enable any change to be constituted as such—apart from in the eyes of a witness, who would himself be the unity of something changing with something that remains.  In brief, the change’s unity with the permanent is necessary for the constitution of a change as such.  But this term itself, “unity,” which Leibniz and Kant misused, does not mean much here.  What do we mean by this unity of disparate elements? Is their attachment merely external? In that case, it has no meaning.  It has to be a unity of being .  But this unity of being amounts to the requirement that the permanent should be what changes, which makes it essentially ecstatic and, in addition, destroys the in-itself character of both permanence and change.  And let nobody say that permanence and change are construed, here, as phenomena and have only a relative being: the in-itself cannot be opposed to the phenomena, like the noumenon.  According to the very terms of our definition, a phenomenon is in itself when it is what it is—even if it is in relation to a subject or another phenomenon.  And, moreover, the appearing of a relation , which determines some phenomena in relation to others, presupposes that an ecstatic being—able to be what it is not—has already arisen, in order to found the “elsewhere” and relatedness.  The appeal to permanence in order to found change is, moreover, utterly useless.  The idea is to show that any absolute change is, strictly speaking, no longer a change, since nothing remains that is changing—or in relation to which there could be change.  But in fact it suffices that what is changing should be its former state, in the mode of the past, for permanence to become redundant.  In such a case, the change may be absolute, and we may be dealing with a metamorphosis that affects the being in its entirety: the change will nonetheless be constituted, in relation to an earlier state that it will be in the past, in the mode of “ was .” With this link to the past as a replacement for the pseudo-necessity of permanence, we may—and should—consider the problem of duration in relation to absolute changes.  Moreover, there is no other kind, not even “in the world.” Up to a certain threshold, they are nonexistent; once this threshold is passed, change extends to the complete form, as the Gestaltists’ experiments have shown.  But in addition, when we are dealing with human-reality, what is necessary is pure and absolute change, which moreover is perfectly able to be a change while nothing changes—and which is duration itself.  Even if, for example, we allowed that a for-itself could be an absolutely empty presence to a permanent in-itself—as this for-itself’s simple consciousness—the very existence of that consciousness would imply temporality, since it would have to be, without changing, what it is, in the form of “having been it.” In that case there would be no eternity but rather the constant necessity for the present for-itself to become the past of a new present, and this would be on account of consciousness’s very being.  And if we are told that this constant recovering of the present into the past by means of a new present implies an internal change in the for-itself, we may reply that it is the for-itself’s temporality that, in this case, is the foundation of the change, and the change does not found the temporality.  Nothing therefore can conceal these problems from us, which appear at first to be insoluble: Why does the present become the past? What is this new present which then springs up? Where does it come from, and why does it arise? And we should note—as our hypothesis of an “empty” consciousness shows—that the necessity in question here is not that anything permanent must cascade from instant to instant, even while materially remaining something permanent, but rather that being, of whatever kind, must metamorphose itself in its entirety and all at once, in form and content, to sink into the past and to produce itself at the same time, ex nihilo , in the direction of the future.  But are there two problems? Let us look more closely: the present cannot pass except by becoming the “ before ” of a for-itself that thereby constitutes itself as “after.” There is therefore just one phenomenon: the arising of a new present that “pastifies” the present that it was and, in the wake of the pastification of a present, the appearing of a for-itself for whom that present will become the past.  41 The phenomenon of temporal becoming is a global modification, since a past of nothing would no longer be a past and since any present must necessarily be the present of this past.  This metamorphosis, moreover, does not extend only to the pure present: the past perfect and the future are equally affected.  The past of the present that has undergone its pastification becomes the past of a past—or the pluperfect.  42 In relation to it, the present’s heterogeneity with the past is immediately eliminated, since what had been distinguished from the past as the present has become the past.  In the course of its metamorphosis, the present remains the present of this past, but it becomes the past present of this past.  That means, in the first instance, that it is homogeneous with the series of the past which reaches back from it right up to the moment of birth and, second, that it is no longer its past in the form of having it to be but in the mode of having had it to be.  The connection between the past and pluperfect is a connection in the mode of the in-itself and it appears upon the foundation of the present for-itself.  That is what maintains the series of the past and the pluperfects, welded into a single block.  On the other hand, although the future is equally affected by the metamorphosis it does not cease to be the future—which means it remains outside the for-itself, in front of it, beyond being—but it becomes the future of a past, or the future perfect.  It can maintain two kinds of relation with the new present, depending on whether it is the immediate future or the distant future.  In the first case, the present is given as being this future in relation to the past: “Here it is, what I was waiting for.” It is the present of its past in the mode of that past’s future perfect.  But at the same time as being for-itself as that past’s future, it actualizes itself as for-itself and therefore as not being what the future promised to be.  A split comes about: the present becomes the future perfect of the past even as it denies its being that future.  And the primitive future is not actualized at all: without having ceased to be the future in relation to the past, it is no longer the future in relation to the present.  It becomes the present’s unrealizable co-present, and preserves a total ideality : “So, is that what I was waiting for?” It remains a future that is ideally co-present to the present, as the unactualized future of this present’s past.  In the case where the future is more remote, it remains as future in relation to the new present but, unless the present is itself constituted as the lack of this future, it loses its character of possibility.  In this case the future perfect becomes a possible to which the new present is indifferent; it is not its possible.  In this sense it no longer possibilizes itself but, in its capacity as possible, it takes on being-in-itself.  It becomes a given possible, i.e., an in itself possible of a for-itself that has become in-itself.  Yesterday, it was possible—in the form of my possible—that I would leave next Monday to go to the country.  Today, this possible is no longer my possible; it remains the object of my contemplation, thematized as the possible, and still in the future, that I have been .  But its only connection with my present is that I have to be this present that has become a past—whose possible, beyond my present, it has not ceased to be—in the mode of “was.” But on the foundation of my present, the future and the past present have become solidified into in-itself.  In this way the future, in the course of the temporal process, passes into in-itself without ever losing its character as the future.  As long as the present has not affected it, it becomes simply the given future.  When the present reaches it, it acquires the character of ideality ; but this ideality is an in itself ideality, because it is presented as the given lack of a given past, and not as the missing item that a present for-itself has to be in the mode of not being .  When the future is surpassed, it remains forever as the future perfect, in the margin of the series of pasts: the future perfect of this past that has become pluperfect; the future ideal that is given as co-present to a present that has become past.  What remains to be studied is the present for-itself’s metamorphosis into the past alongside the interrelated arising of a new present.  It would be a mistake to believe the abolition of a previous present involves the arising of a present in-itself , able to preserve an image of the present that has disappeared.  In a sense, we should almost reverse the terms to get to the truth, since the pastification of the ex-present is a transition to the in-itself, while the appearance of a new present is the nihilation of this in-itself.  The present is not a new in-itself: it is what is not, and what is beyond being; it is that about which we can only say “it is” in the past; the past is not abolished and it has become what it was; the past is the being of the present.  Finally, as we have sufficiently emphasized, the relation of the present to the past is a relation of being, not of representation.  So the primary feature to strike us is the way the for-itself is seized back by being, as if it no longer had the strength to maintain its own nothingness.  The deep fissure that the for-itself has to be gets filled in, and the nothingness that must “be been” ceases so to be, and is expelled, to the extent to which the pastified being-for-itself becomes a quality of the in-itself.  If I have felt this sadness, in the past, it exists no longer in the way in which I felt it: this sadness no longer has exactly that degree of being that an appearance that makes itself its own witness can have; it is, because it has been; its being comes to it almost as an external necessity.  The past is a backward fatality: the for-itself makes itself what it wants, but it cannot escape the necessity that a new for-itself will be, irremediably, what it wanted to be.  The past, therefore, is a for-itself that has ceased to be a transcending presence to the in-itself.  As itself in itself, it has fallen into the midst of the world .  I am what I have to be as presence to the world that I am not; but I was what I was in the midst of the world, in the manner of things, as an intraworldly existent.  Nonetheless, this world in which the for-itself has to be what it was cannot be the same as the one to which it is currently present.  In this way, the for-itself’s past is constituted as a past presence to a past state of the world.  Even if the world has not varied in any way while the for-itself “was passing” from the present to the past, it is at least grasped as having undergone the same formal change that we described earlier within being-for-itself.  This change is no longer anything but a reflection of the true internal change in consciousness.  In other words, the for-itself, falling into the past as an ex-presence to being that has become in-itself, becomes a being “in the midst of the world”—and the world is retained in the dimension of the past as that in the midst of which the past for-itself is in itself.  Like the mermaid whose human body ends in a fish’s tail, the extraworldly for-itself ends, behind itself, in a thing in the world .  I am quick-tempered, or melancholic, I have the Oedipus complex or the inferiority complex forever—but in the past, in the form of “was,” in the midst of the world, in the way that I am a civil servant, or one-armed, or proletarian.  In the past the world hems me in and I become lost within a universal determinism, but I radically transcend my past toward my future, to just the extent to which I “was” that past.  A for-itself that has expressed all its nothingness, seized back by the in-itself and diluting itself into the world: such is the past that I have to be; such is the for-itself’s avatar.  But this avatar is produced in connection with the appearing of a for-itself that nihilates itself as presence to the world, and that has its transcended past to be.  What is the meaning of this arising of the for-itself? We must be careful not to regard it as the appearance of a new being.  It is as if the present were a constant hole in being which, the moment it is filled in, constantly reappears: as if the present were in constant flight from the threat of becoming bogged down in “in itself,” a threat that continues until the in-itself’s final victory, which drags it into a past that is no longer any for-itself’s past.  This victory is death, because death puts a radical stop to temporality, by pastifying the entire system or, alternatively, by the in-itself’s seizing back of the human totality.  How can we explain this dynamic character of temporality? If the latter is not—as we hope to have shown—a contingent quality added to the for-itself’s being, we ought to be able to show that its dynamic is an essential structure of the for-itself, conceived as the being that has its own nothingness to be.  We seem to be back where we started.  But the truth is that there is no problem.  If we thought we had encountered one, that is because, in spite of our efforts to formulate the for-itself as such, we have not been able to stop ourselves freezing it into in-itself.  In fact, if we take the in-itself as our point of departure, the appearance of change becomes a problem: if the in-itself is what it is, how can it no longer be it? But if, on the contrary, we start from an adequate understanding of the for-itself, what needs explaining will no longer be change: instead, it would be permanence, if it were able to exist.  Indeed, if we consider our description of the order of time—aside from anything that might result from its course—it becomes clear that, once temporality is reduced to its order, it immediately becomes an in-itself temporality.  The ecstatic character of temporal being can make no difference, since that character is now located in the past—not as the for-itself’s constitution but as a quality supported by the in-itself.  And if we envisage a future, just insofar as it is straightforwardly a future of a for-itself, which is the for-itself of a specific past, and if we think change poses a new problem in relation to the description of temporality as such, we will be conferring upon the future, conceived as this future, an instantaneous immobility, and making the for-itself into a frozen quality, a quality that can be designated; in the end, the entire structure becomes a made totality; the future and the past confine the for-itself and constitute its given limits.  The whole structure, as a temporality that is , lies petrified around a solid core—which is the for-itself’s present instant—and the real problem now is to explain how, from this instant, another instant can arise, with its retinue of past and future.  We have escaped from the theory of instants—to the extent to which we regard the instant as the only in-itself reality, limited by a future nothingness and a past nothingness—but we have fallen back into it by implicitly conceding a succession of temporal totalities, each of which is centered around an instant.  In brief, we have given the instant some ecstatic dimensions but, as we have not thereby eliminated it, we are supporting the temporal totality by the timeless; time, if it is , becomes a dream once again.  But change naturally belongs to the for-itself, insofar as this for-itself is a spontaneity.  A spontaneity about which we are able to say “it is ,” or simply “ this spontaneity,” ought to generate its own definition, i.e., it will be the foundation not only of its nothingness of being but also of its being and, simultaneously, that being will seize it back, in order to freeze it into the given.  A spontaneity that posits itself as spontaneity is immediately obliged to reject what it posits, or its being will become an acquisition, and it will be by dint of this acquisition that it perpetuates itself in being.  And this rejection is itself an acquisition that has to be rejected, on pain of getting bogged down within an inert prolongation of its existence.  It might be said that these notions of prolongation and acquisition already presuppose temporality—and that is true.  But that is because spontaneity itself constitutes what it acquires by rejecting it, and what it rejects by acquiring it—because unless it temporalizes itself it cannot be.  Its distinctive nature means it does not profit from the acquisition it constitutes in actualizing itself as a spontaneity.  It is impossible to conceive of spontaneity in any other way, unless we contract it into an instant and by that very means freeze it into in-itself, i.e., unless we suppose that time is transcendent.  It is futile to object that we are unable to think about anything outside the form of temporality and that—since we temporalize being in order, a moment later, to derive time from it—our view begs the question: it is futile to remind us of the passages in the Critique where Kant shows that a timeless spontaneity is inconceivable but not contradictory.  It seems to us, on the contrary, that a spontaneity that did not escape from itself, and did not escape from that very act of escaping—of which we could say “it is thus,” and confine it within an immutable name—would precisely be a contradiction, and would in the end amount to a particular affirmative essence, an eternal subject that is never a predicate.  And it is precisely its character as spontaneity which constitutes even this irreversibility of its escapes, since, the moment it appears, it is precisely in order to reject itself and the “assertion-rejection” sequence cannot be reversed.  In effect, the assertion itself ends up as a rejection, without ever attaining the plenitude of affirmation: otherwise it would exhaust itself within an instantaneous in-itself, and it is only insofar as it is rejected that it passes over into being, within the totality of its achievement.  The combined series of “assertion-rejections,” moreover, has ontological priority over change , because change is merely the relation of the material contents in the series.  And we have shown such an irreversibility of temporalization to be necessary to the entirely empty and a priori form of a spontaneity.  We have presented our thesis by using the concept of spontaneity, which we thought would be more familiar to our readers.  But we are able now to redeploy these ideas within the perspective of the for-itself, and using our own terminology.  A for-itself that did not endure would remain, of course, the negation of the transcendent in-itself and the nihilation of its own being, in the form of a “reflection-reflecting.” But this nihilation would become a given , which is to say it would acquire the contingency of the in-itself, and the for-itself would cease to be the foundation of its own nothingness: it would no longer be anything, as having it to be; rather, within the nihilating unity of the reflection-reflecting dyad, it would be .  The for-itself’s flight is a rejection of contingency, through the very act that constitutes it as being the foundation of its nothingness.  But what this flight constitutes as contingency is precisely what it flees from: the for-itself it flees from remains on the spot.  It cannot annihilate itself, since I am it, but neither can it be in the form of the foundation of its own nothingness, since it can be only in fleeing: it is achieved .  Naturally, what is true of the for-itself as presence to… is also true of the totality of temporalization.  This totality is not ever completed: it is a totality that rejects and flees from itself; it separates from itself, in the unity of a single event of arising; it is an elusive totality that, at the moment it is given, already lies beyond this gift of itself.  The time of consciousness, therefore, is human-reality temporalizing itself as a totality that is its own unfinished task; it is a nothingness, sliding into a totality like a detotalizing enzyme.  This totality is simultaneously chasing after, and rejecting itself; it is unable to find any final term within itself for its surpassing, because it is its own surpassing, and surpasses itself toward itself; such a totality cannot, in any case, exist within the limits of an instant.  There is never an instant in which we can assert that the for-itself is—precisely because the for-itself never is.  On the contrary, temporality temporalizes itself entirely as a rejection of the instant.  III.  ORIGINAL TEMPORALITY AND PSYCHOLOGICAL TEMPORALITY: REFLECTION The for-itself endures in the form of a non-thetic consciousness (of) enduring.  But I am able to “feel time passing” and to apprehend myself as a unity of succession.  In this case I am conscious of enduring.  This consciousness is thetic and closely resembles knowledge, just as the duration being temporalized before my eyes comes close to being an object of consciousness.  What kind of relation exists between original temporality and this psychological temporality that I encounter as soon as I apprehend myself “in the course of enduring?” This problem leads us immediately to another problem, because to be conscious of duration is to be conscious of a consciousness that endures; in consequence, to ask about the nature and entitlements of this thetic consciousness of duration amounts to asking about the nature and entitlements of reflection.  Indeed, it is to reflection that temporality appears in the form of psychological duration and all the processes of psychological duration belong to a consciousness that is reflected on.  Before we ask, therefore, how any psychological duration is able to be constituted as an immanent object of reflection, we ought to try to answer this preliminary question: How is reflection possible for a being that can be only in the past? Descartes and Husserl present reflection as an advantageous type of intuition, because it grasps consciousness in a present and instantaneous act of immanence.  Can its certainty be preserved, if the being to be known is past in relation to it? And as our entire ontology is founded in a reflective experience, is it not at risk of losing all its authority? 43 And incidentally, must the object of reflective acts of consciousness really be past being? As for reflection itself, if that is for-itself, must it be limited to an instantaneous existence and certainty? We can decide this only by returning to the phenomenon of reflection, in order to determine its structure.  Reflection is the for-itself as conscious of itself.  As the for-itself is already a non-thetic consciousness (of) self, we are used to representing reflection as a new consciousness, suddenly appearing, targeting the reflected consciousness and living in symbiosis with it.  Spinoza’s old idea ideae may be recognized here.  But, in addition to the difficulty of explaining how reflective consciousness arises ex nihilo , it is completely impossible to account for its absolute unity with reflected consciousness, a unity which alone can render the authority and certainty of reflective intuition conceivable.  We cannot define here the esse of what is reflected on as a percipi , since its being is, precisely, such that it does not need to be perceived in order to exist.  And its primary relation with reflection cannot be the relation that unites a representation with a thinking subject.  In short, if the known existent must have the same dignity of being as the knowing existent, we will have to adopt the perspective of naïve realism to describe the relation between these two existents.  But in that case, precisely, we will encounter realism’s major difficulty: How can two isolated and independent wholes—possessing the sufficiency of being that Germans call “ Selbstständigkeit ”—sustain any relations with each other and, in particular, the type of internal relations that go by the name of “knowledge?” If we conceive of reflection first as an autonomous consciousness, we will never be able to reunite it subsequently with the reflected consciousness.  They will always add up to two and, if by some miracle the reflective consciousness was able to be conscious of the reflected consciousness, this connection between the two consciousnesses could only be external ; at most, we might envisage that the reflection, isolated in itself, possesses something like an image of the consciousness it reflects on, and we would fall back into idealism.  Reflective knowledge, and the cogito in particular, would lose their certainty and would obtain nothing in return other than a specific probability that would, moreover, be difficult to define.  We should allow, therefore, that a connection of being joins reflection to what it reflects on, and that reflective consciousness is the consciousness it reflects on.  But, on the other hand, there can be no question here of a complete identification of the reflective with the reflected: that would immediately eliminate the phenomenon of reflection, and allow only the phantom duality of the “reflection-reflecting” to remain.  Here we encounter, once again, the type of being that defines the for-itself: reflection requires, if it is to be apodictic evidence, that the reflective should be what it reflects on.  But, to the extent to which it is knowledge , it is necessary that the reflected consciousness should be an object for reflective consciousness, which implies a separation from it.  Thus it is necessary at the same time for the reflective consciousness to be, and not to be, what it reflects on.  We have already come across this ontological structure at the heart of the for-itself.  But there it did not have quite the same meaning.  In effect, it presupposed a radical “ Unselbstständigkeit ” in the two terms, “reflected and reflecting,” of the nascent duality, i.e., an inability to posit themselves separately, such that the duality remained constantly evanescent and such that each term, in positing itself for the other, became the other.  But the case of reflection is rather different, since the “reflection-reflecting” that is reflected on exists for a reflective “reflection-reflecting.” In other words, what is reflected on is an appearance for the reflective consciousness without however thereby ceasing to be a witness (of) itself, and the reflective consciousness witnesses what it reflects on, without thereby ceasing to be an appearance in relation to itself.  It is even insofar as it is reflected in itself that what is reflected on can be an appearance for reflective consciousness, and the reflective consciousness can be a witness only insofar as it is conscious (of) being one, i.e., only to the precise extent to which this witness that it is is a reflection for a reflecting that it also is.  The reflective consciousness and the consciousness it reflects on each tend, therefore, toward “ Selbstständigkeit ” and the nothing that separates them divides them more deeply than the nothingness of the for-itself separates the reflection from the reflecting.  44 Only, we should note: (1) that the reflection that takes the form of a witness can have its being as a witness only in and through the appearance, which is to say that its reflexivity profoundly affects it in its being and, this being so, it can never attain the “ Selbstständigkeit ” it aims at, since it derives its being from its function, and its function from the for-itself it reflects on; (2) that what is reflected on is profoundly altered by reflection, because it is a consciousness (of) self as a reflected-on consciousness of this or that transcendent phenomenon.  It knows itself to be looked at: to use a sensory image, we can find no better comparison for it than a man bent over a table who is writing and who knows, even while he is writing, that he is being observed by someone standing behind him.  What is reflected on is therefore already, in a way, conscious (of) itself as having an outside or, rather, the beginnings of an outside , which is to say that it makes itself an object for… so that its meaning as something reflected on is inseparable from the reflective, and exists over there, at a distance from itself, in the consciousness reflecting on it.  In this sense, it does not possess any more “ Selbstständigkeit ” than the reflective consciousness itself.  Husserl tells us that what we reflect on “is given as having been there before the reflection.” But we should not be misled by this: the “ Selbstständigkeit ” that characterizes unreflected consciousness—insofar as it is unreflected in relation to any possible reflection—does not pass over into the phenomenon of reflection, precisely because the phenomenon loses its unreflected character.  For a consciousness, to become reflected is to undergo a deep modification in its being and precisely to lose the “ Selbstständigkeit ” it possessed insofar as it was the “reflected-reflecting” quasi-totality.  At any rate, to the extent that a nothingness separates reflective consciousness from what it reflects on, this nothingness—which cannot derive its being from itself—must “be been.” We should take this to mean that only a unitary structure of being can be its own nothingness, in the form of having it to be .  In fact, neither reflective consciousness nor what it reflects on is able to establish this separating nothingness.  But reflection is, just like the unreflected for-itself, a being , not an addition of being— a being that has its own nothingness to be ; it is not the appearing of a new consciousness, directed on the for-itself, but a modification in its internal structure, actualized in itself by the for-itself; in brief, it is the for-itself itself that makes itself exist in the reflective-reflected-on mode, rather than simply being in the reflected-reflecting mode, where this new mode of being, moreover, allows the reflected-reflecting mode to subsist as the primary internal structure.  The person who reflects on me is not some kind of pure, timeless gaze: it is myself, an enduring me, who is committed within the circuit of my ipseity, in danger within the world, and with my historicity.  Only the for-itself that I am lives this historicity, this being in the world, and this circuit of ipseity in the mode of a reflective splitting into two.  As we have seen, reflective consciousness is separated from what it reflects on by a nothingness.  In this way, the phenomenon of reflection is a nihilation of the for-itself that does not come to it from outside but that it has to be .  Where does this more pronounced nihilation come from? What can its motivation be? In the for-itself’s arising as presence to being, there is an original dispersion: the for-itself loses itself outside, alongside the in-itself, and within the three temporal ecstases.  It is outside itself and, in its innermost being, this being-for-itself is ecstatic, since it has to seek its being elsewhere—in the reflecting, if it makes itself reflected, or in the reflected, if it posits itself as reflecting.  The arising of the for-itself confirms the failure of the in-itself, which was unable to be its own foundation.  Reflection remains a permanent possibility for the for-itself, as an attempt to reclaim being.  Through reflection, the for-itself that gets lost outside itself attempts to internalize itself within its being; this is a second attempt to found itself, which involves its being for itself what it is .  If indeed the reflection-reflecting quasi-duality was gathered into a totality for a witness identical to itself, it would be in its own eyes what it is.  In short, the goal is to overcome the being that flees from itself by being what it is in the mode of not being, and which, in being its own flowing away, flows by; it is to overcome the being that slips through its own fingers, and make of it something given , a given that, finally, is what it is .  The goal is to gather within the unity of a gaze this incomplete totality, which is not complete only because it is, in relation to itself, its own incompleteness; it is to escape from the sphere of the constant referral that has, in relation to itself, its referral to be, and—precisely because one has escaped through this referral’s net—to make that referral be as something seen , i.e., as a referral that is what it is.  But at the same time it is necessary that this being that reclaims and founds itself as a given—i.e., which confers being’s contingency upon itself, in order to come to its rescue by founding it—should itself be what it reclaims and founds, what it rescues from ecstatic dispersal.  The motivation of reflection consists in a twofold and simultaneous attempt at objectification and internalization.  To be, in relation to oneself, an object-in-itself within the absolute unity of internalization: that is what reflection-being has to be.  This attempt to be, in relation to oneself, one’s own foundation, to reclaim and to dominate one’s own flight within interiority, in order finally to be this flight—rather than temporalizing it as a flight that flees from itself—must end in failure; and reflection is precisely this failure.  In point of fact, the being who gets lost is itself the being who has to reclaim it, and it is obliged to be this reclamation in the mode of being that belongs to it, i.e., in the mode of the for-itself, and therefore of flight.  It is insofar as it is for-itself that the for-itself will attempt to be what it is or, alternatively, it will be for itself what it is-for-itself.  Thus reflection, or the endeavor to reclaim the for-itself by turning back on itself, leads to the for-itself’s appearing for the for-itself.  The being that wishes to found something within being is itself the foundation only of its own nothingness.  The structure remains, therefore, nihilated in-itself.  And at the same time, being’s turning back on itself can only make a distance appear between its turning back and what it turns back to.  This turning back on itself is a self-separation, in order to turn back.  And this turning back makes the nothingness of reflection appear, because the for-itself’s structural necessity requires that it can be retrieved in its being only by a being that itself exists in the form of the for-itself.  Thus, the being that operates this recovery must be constituted in the mode of the for-itself, and the being to be reclaimed must exist as for-itself.  And these two beings must be the same being , but precisely, insofar as that being reclaims itself , it brings into existence an absolute distance between itself and itself, within the unity of being.  This phenomenon of reflection is a permanent possibility for the for-itself, because a reflective scissiparity lies as a potentiality within the for-itself that is reflected on: indeed, it suffices for the reflecting for-itself to posit itself as a witness of the reflection for it , and for the reflection-for-itself to posit itself for it as the reflection of this reflecting.  45 Thus reflection, as an attempt at the retrieval of a for-itself by a for-itself that (in the mode of not-being) it is, is an intermediate stage of nihilation between the pure and simple existence of the for-itself and existence for the Other as an act of retrieval of a for-itself by a for-itself that it is not, in the mode of not-being.  46 Can we limit the authority and scope of reflection, as we have just described it, by appealing to the fact that the for-itself temporalizes itself? We do not think so.  If we want to grasp the reflective phenomenon in its relation to temporality, we need to distinguish between two kinds of reflection: reflection can be pure or impure.  Pure reflection, which is the simple presence of the reflective for-itself to the for-itself it reflects on, is the original form of reflection and, at the same time, its ideal form: impure reflection appears on the foundation of pure reflection and, in addition, the latter is never given from the outset; it has to be won through a sort of catharsis .  Impure or complicit reflection, which we will discuss later, includes pure reflection but goes beyond it, because it presses its claims further.  47 What are the entitlements and authority of pure reflection with respect to evidence? Reflective consciousness is evidently what it reflects on.  If we left that behind, we would have no means of legitimizing reflection.  But reflective consciousness is what it reflects on in full immanence, even though it has the form of “not-being-in-itself.” This is shown clearly by the fact that what we reflect on is not quite an object but a quasi-object for reflection.  In effect the consciousness that we reflect on is not yet delivered up to reflection as an “outside,” i.e., as a being on which we might “take up a point of view,” in relation to which we can take a step back, or increase or diminish the distance separating us from it.  For the consciousness we reflect on to be “seen from outside” and for our reflection to be able to orient itself in relation to it, it would be necessary for our reflective consciousness to not be what it reflects on, in the mode of not being what it is not; this scissiparity can be actualized only in existence for the Other .  Reflection is knowledge; that is beyond doubt; it possesses a positional character, and it affirms the consciousness it reflects on.  But, as we will soon see, every affirmation is conditioned by a negation: to affirm this object is simultaneously to deny that I am this object.  To know something is to make oneself other.  Now, precisely, a reflective consciousness is not quite able to make itself other than what it reflects on, since it is-in-order-to-be what it reflects on.  Its affirmation is stopped midway, because its negation is not entirely actualized.  It does not therefore completely detach itself from what it reflects on, and cannot embrace it “from some point of view.” Its knowledge is totalizing: it is a lightning intuition without any contrasts, or any point of departure, or any point of arrival.  Everything is given at once, in a kind of absolute proximity.  What we ordinarily call “knowing” presupposes contrasts, levels, an order, a hierarchy.  Even mathematical essences are revealed to us with an orientation in relation to other truths, to specific consequences; they are never disclosed with all their characteristics at the same time.  But the reflection that delivers up to us what it reflects on—not as something given but as the being that we have to be—without any distinction or point of view, is a knowledge that overflows itself and is inexplicable.  At the same time, it never surprises itself; it teaches us nothing, and only posits .  In the case of knowledge of a transcendent object, the object is effectively disclosed —and the disclosed object may disappoint or astonish us.  But reflective disclosure posits a being that was already a disclosure in its being.  The reflection confines itself to making this disclosure exist for itself; the disclosed being is not revealed as something given but with the character of having “already been disclosed.” Rather than being knowledge, reflection is recognition .  It implies a prereflective understanding of what it aims to retrieve as the original motivation for that retrieval.  But if reflective consciousness is what it reflects on—if this unity of being founds and limits the authority of reflection—we ought to add that what we reflect on is itself its past and its future.  There is no doubt, therefore, that reflective consciousness, even though it is constantly overflowed by the totality of what it reflects on (and that it is, in the mode of not being it), extends the authority of apodicticity to the very totality that it is.  Thus we should not limit Descartes’s reflective conquest, the cogito , to the infinitesimal instant.  We can reach this conclusion, moreover, from the fact that thinking is an act that commits the past, and is sketched out in advance by the future.  “I doubt, therefore I am,” said Descartes.  But what would remain of methodic doubt if we were able to limit it to the instant? A suspension of judgment, perhaps.  But a suspension of judgment is not doubt but only a necessary structure of doubt.  For there to be doubt, it is necessary for this suspension to be motivated by an insufficiency of reasons either to assert or to deny—which refers to the past—and that it should be deliberately maintained until new elements intervene—which is already a project of the future.  Doubt appears against the ground of a preontological understanding of knowing , and of requirements concerning truth.  This understanding and these requirements, which give doubt all its meaning, commit the totality of human-reality and its being in the world: they presuppose the existence of an object of knowledge and of doubt, i.e., a transcendent permanence within universal time; doubt therefore is a conduct that involves combination, and represents one of human-reality’s modes of being in the world.  48 To discover oneself as doubting is already to be: ahead of oneself, in the future that contains the goal, the ending, and the meaning of this doubt; and behind oneself, in the past that contains the constitutive motivations of the doubt and its phases; and outside oneself, in the world, as a presence to the object one is doubting.  The same points will apply to any reflective observation: I am reading; I am dreaming; I am perceiving; I am acting.  Either they must lead us to withhold apodictic evidence from reflection—in which case the original knowledge that I have of myself collapses into probability, and my very existence is only a probability, because my being-in-the-instant is not a being—or else we will have to extend the authority of reflection to the human totality: to the past, to the future, to presence, and to the object.  Now, if our findings are correct, reflection is a for-itself seeking to reclaim itself as a totality that is constantly in a state of incompleteness.  It affirms the disclosure of the being that is, in relation to itself, its own disclosure.  And as the for-itself temporalizes itself, the consequences are: (1) that reflection, as a mode of being of the for-itself, must be in the form of temporalization and that it is, itself, its past and its future; (2) that, by virtue of its nature, its authority and certainty extend as far as the possibilities that I am and to the past that I was .  Reflective consciousness does not grasp what it reflects on as an instant, but neither is it instantaneous itself.  This does not mean that reflective consciousness knows, with its future, the future that it reflects on, or that, with its past, it knows the past of the consciousness that it knows.  On the contrary, it is through the future and the past that the reflective consciousness and what it reflects on are distinguished in the unity of their being.  The reflective consciousness’s future is, in effect, the set of distinctive possibilities that the reflective consciousness has to be, as reflective.  As such, it cannot include any consciousness of the future that it reflects on.  The same remarks apply to the reflective past, even though this latter will be founded, ultimately, in the past of the original for-itself.  But if it draws its meaning from its future and its past, reflection is already—insofar as it is a fleeing presence to a flight—ecstatically extended throughout this flight.  In other words, the for-itself that makes itself exist in the mode of a reflective split into two derives its meaning, as for-itself, from its possibilities and from its future; in this sense, reflection is a diasporic phenomenon; but, as self-presence , it is a presence that is present to all its ecstatic dimensions.  We still need to explain—it might be said—how this supposedly apodictic reflection is able to make so many mistakes, precisely in relation to that past which we accord it the right to know.  Our answer will be that it makes no mistakes at all, to exactly the degree to which it grasps the past as something haunting the present in a non-thematic form.  As we have shown, when I say “I am reading,” “I am doubting,” “I am hoping,” etc., I overflow in great measure my present, toward my past.  And I cannot go wrong, in any of these cases.  The apodicticity of reflection is not in doubt, to the extent to which it grasps the past exactly as it is for the reflected consciousness that has it to be.  If, on the other hand, I am able to make a great many mistakes when, in the mode of reflection, I remember my past feelings or ideas, that is because I am at the level of memory: in that moment I am no longer my past, but I thematize it.  We are no longer dealing, therefore, with an act of reflection.  Thus reflection is a consciousness of the three ecstatic dimensions.  It is a non-thetic consciousness (of) flowing, and a thetic consciousness of duration.  For it, the past and the present of what it reflects on begin to exist as quasi-outsides , in the sense that they are not only held within the unity of a for-itself that exhausts their being by having it to be but also for a for-itself that is separated from them by a nothingness, for a for-itself that—although it exists with them within the unity of a being—does not have their being to be.  And in addition, through reflection, the flowing tends toward being, like an “outside” sketched out within immanence.  But pure reflection still encounters temporality only in its original non-substantiality, in its refusal to be in-itself: it encounters possibles insofar as they are possibles , made lighter by the for-itself’s freedom; it discloses the present as transcending and, if the past appears to it as in-itself, it remains on the foundation of presence.  And finally, reflection encounters the for-itself in its detotalized totality, as the incomparable individuality that it is itself in the mode of having it to be; it encounters it as the “reflected-on” par excellence , the being that only ever exists as itself and that is this “itself,” therefore, at a distance from itself, in the future, in the past, in the world.  Reflection, therefore, grasps temporality insofar as it is disclosed as the unique and incomparable mode of being of an ipseity, i.e., as historicity.  But the psychological duration that we are acquainted with and use daily is the opposite of historicity, insofar as it consists in successions of organized temporal figures.  In point of fact, it is the concrete weave of psychological units in a flow.  This joy, for example, is an organized form appearing in the wake of some sadness and, earlier on, there was the humiliation I experienced yesterday.  Between these units in the flow—qualities, states, and acts—the relations of “before” and “after” are usually established, and we can even make use of these units to date events.  In this way, the reflective consciousness of man-within-the-world finds itself, in its daily existence, confronted with psychological objects that are what they are, appearing on the continuous texture of our temporality like designs and motifs on a tapestry, and succeeding each other in the manner of things in the world, within universal time—i.e., by replacing each other without maintaining any relations with each other apart from purely external relations of succession.  We talk about a joy that I have or that I had , 49 and we call it my joy, as if I were its support and it stood out against me in the way in which Spinoza’s finite modes stand out against the attribute’s ground.  We even say that I feel this joy, as if it came to imprint itself like a seal on the fabric of my temporalization or, better still, as if the presence within me of these feelings, ideas, and states was a kind of visitation .  50 This psychological duration constituted by the concrete flow of autonomous structures—or, in other words, by the succession of psychological facts , of facts of consciousness—cannot be called an illusion: indeed, their reality provides the object of psychology; in practical terms, it is at the level of psychological fact that concrete relations between men—demands, jealousies, resentments, suggestions, battles, stratagems, etc.—are established.  However, we cannot conceive of the unreflected for-itself—which historializes itself as it arises 51 —as itself being these qualities, states and acts.  Its unity of being would collapse into a multiplicity of existents, each external to the other; the ontological problem of temporality would reappear and, this time, we would have removed any means of resolving it because, even if it is possible for the for-itself to be its own past, it would be absurd to require my joy to be the sadness that preceded it, even in the mode of “not-being.” The psychologists offer a degraded representation of this ecstatic existence when they assert that psychological facts are relative to each other, and that we apprehend the thunderclap that we hear after a long silence as a “thunderclap-after-a-long-silence.” That is all well and good, but by removing from it any ontological foundation they have made it impossible for themselves to explain this relativity within succession.  In fact, if we apprehend the for-itself in its historicity, psychological duration vanishes; states, qualities, and acts disappear, to make way for being-for-itself as such, which exists only as the unique individuality whose historializing process is indivisible.  That individuality is what flows by and calls to itself from the depths of the future and is weighed down by the past that it was; it is what historializes its ipseity, and we know that—in its primary or unreflected mode—it is conscious of the world, and not conscious of itself.  Thus, qualities and states cannot be beings within its being (in the sense in which the flowing unit of “joy” might be a “content” or a “fact” of consciousness); all that exists of it is internal non-positional nuances of color, nuances which are nothing other than itself, insofar as it is a for-itself, and that cannot be apprehended outside it.  We find ourselves therefore in the presence of two temporalities: original temporality, of which we are the temporalization; and psychological temporality, which exists at the same time both as something incompatible with our being’s mode of being, and as an intersubjective reality, an object of science, a goal of human actions (in the sense, for example, in which I do everything I can to “make myself loved” by Anny, to make her “ feel love for me ”).  This psychological temporality, which is obviously derived , cannot be a direct product of original temporality; nothing is constituted by the latter apart from itself.  As for psychological temporality, it is incapable of constituting itself , because it is only a successive order of facts.  Moreover, psychological temporality cannot appear to the unreflected for-itself, which is a pure ecstatic presence to the world: it is to reflection that it is disclosed, and by which it must be constituted.  But how is it possible for reflection to do this, if it is purely and simply the uncovering of the historicity that it is? At this point we need to distinguish pure reflection from impure or constituting reflection, because it is impure reflection that constitutes the succession of psychological facts, or psychè .  And, in daily life, impure or constituting reflection is given first, even though it incorporates pure reflection within it as its original structure.  But this latter can be attained only after a modification, effected by itself, in the form of a catharsis .  This is not the place to describe the motivation for, and structure of, this catharsis .  What matters to us is to describe impure reflection insofar as it constitutes and discloses psychological temporality.  Reflection, as we have seen, is a type of being in which the for-itself is, for the purpose of being what it is in relation to itself.  52 Reflection does not therefore capriciously arise within being’s pure indifference but is produced within the perspective of a “ for the purpose of .” Indeed, we have seen just here that the for-itself is the being that is, in its being, the foundation of any “for.” The meaning of reflection, therefore, is its being-for.  In particular, reflective consciousness involves a self-nihilation in what it reflects on for the purpose of retrieving itself.  In this sense, reflective consciousness, insofar as it has what it reflects on to be, escapes from the for-itself that it is qua reflective in the form of “having it to be.” But if it did that only for the purpose of being the reflected-on that it has to be, it would, in escaping from the for-itself, rediscover it; everywhere, and no matter how it affects itself, the for-itself is condemned to being-for-itself.  In effect, that is exactly what pure reflection discovers.  But impure reflection, as the first (but not the original ) spontaneous movement of reflection, is- for -the-purpose-of- being 53 what it reflects on in the form of in-itself.  Its motivation lies within itself, in a twofold movement—which we have described—of internalization and objectification: to grasp what it reflects on as in-itself, in order to make itself be this in-itself it grasps.  Impure reflection, therefore, only grasps what it reflects on as such within a circuit of ipseity, where it stands in immediate relation with an in-itself that it has to be.  But on the other hand, this in-itself that reflective consciousness has to be is what it reflects on insofar as the reflective consciousness attempts to apprehend it as being in-itself.  In consequence, there are three forms within impure reflection: the reflective consciousness; what it reflects on; and an in-itself that the reflective has to be, insofar as this in-itself will be what it reflects on—which is nothing but the in-order-to of the phenomenon of reflection.  This in-itself is sketched out in advance, behind the reflected-for-itself, by a movement of reflection that traverses what it reflects on, in order to reclaim and to found it; it is like a projection of the reflected-for-itself into the in-itself, as its meaning; its being is not to be but to-be-been , like nothingness.  It is what is reflected as a pure object for reflective consciousness.  From the moment reflection takes up a point of view on its reflecting, and thereby moves away from that lightning and dimensionless intuition in which what is reflected on is given to reflective consciousness without any point of view, and as soon as it posits itself as not being what it reflects on and as determining what that is , reflection brings into view—behind what it reflects on—an in-itself that can be determined and qualified.  This transcendent in-itself—or the shadow cast into being by what is reflected on—is what reflective consciousness has to be , insofar as it is what the reflected is .  We should not confuse it in any way with the value of what we reflect on—which is given to reflection in its totalizing and undifferentiated intuition—nor with the value that haunts reflective consciousness as a non-thetic absence, and as the in-order-to of reflective consciousness, insofar as it is non-positionally conscious (of) itself.  It is the necessary object of any reflection; for it to arise, it suffices that reflection should regard what it reflects on as an object; it is just that decision, through which reflective consciousness determines itself to consider what it reflects on as an object, that makes the in-itself appear as the transcendent objectification of what it reflects on.  And the act through which reflection determines itself to take what it reflects on as an object is, in itself: (1) a positing of reflective consciousness as not being what it reflects on; (2) the adoption of a point of view in relation to what is reflected on.  In reality, moreover, these two moments amount to just one, since the concrete negation that reflective consciousness makes itself be in relation to what it reflects on is manifested precisely in and through the fact of taking up a point of view.  The act of objectification is, we can see, a direct prolongation of the reflective splitting into two, since this split comes about through a deepening of the nothingness that separates the reflection from the reflecting.  54 The objectification takes up the reflective movement as not being what it reflects on in order that what is reflected on should appear to reflective consciousness as an object.  Only this reflection is in bad faith, because if it appears to sever the link that joins reflective consciousness to what it reflects on, if it seems to assert that reflective consciousness is not what it reflects on in the mode of not being what it is not—whereas, in reflection as it originally arises, reflective consciousness is not what it reflects on in the mode of not being what it is—it does so in order to subsequently resume the assertion of identity and to assert, in relation to this in-itself, that “I am it .” In brief, reflection is in bad faith insofar as it is constituted as disclosing the object that I myself am .  But, in the second place, this more radical nihilation is not a real and metaphysical event: the real event, the third process of nihilation, is the for-the-Other .  Impure reflection is an abortive effort on the part of the for-itself to be another by remaining itself .  The transcendent object that has appeared behind the reflected for-itself is the only being about which the reflective consciousness can say, in this sense, that it is not it .  But it is a shadow of being.  It is been, and reflective consciousness has it to be, in order to not be it.  It is this shadow of being, the necessary and constant correlative of impure reflection, that the psychologist studies as the so-called psychological fact .  The psychological fact is, therefore, the shadow of what is reflected on, insofar as reflective consciousness has it ecstatically to be, in the mode of not-being.  Thus, reflection is impure when it presents itself as an “intuition of the for-itself in the in-itself”; what is disclosed to it is not the temporal and insubstantial historicity of what it reflects on but—beyond what it reflects on—the actual substantiality of organized forms within the flow.  The unity of these virtual beings is called psychological life , or the psychè , a virtual and transcendent in-itself that subtends the for-itself’s temporalization.  Pure reflection is only ever a quasi-knowledge, but the only thing of which reflective knowledge is possible is the Psychè .  Naturally, in every psychological object we will rediscover the characteristics of what is really reflected on, but degraded into in-itself.  A brief and a priori description of the psychè will enable us to understand this.  (1) By “ psychè ” we mean the Ego , its states, its qualities, and its acts.  The Ego , in the twofold grammatical form of the “I” and the “Me,” represents our person insofar as it is a transcendent psychological unity.  We have described it elsewhere.  55 It is as an Ego that we are subjects de facto and subjects de jure , active and passive, voluntary agents, possible objects of an evaluative judgment, or a judgment of responsibility.  The Ego ’s qualities represent the set of virtualities, latencies, and potentialities that constitute our character and our habits (in the Greek sense of ἕξις).  It is a “quality” to be quick-tempered, hardworking, jealous, ambitious, sensuous, etc.  But we should also recognize qualities of another kind, originating in our history, to which we may refer as habits : I may be aged , weary , embittered , diminished , or making progress ; I may appear to myself as “having grown in confidence since my success” or, on the contrary, as “having gradually developed the tastes, habits, and sexuality of a patient” (after a long illness).  In opposition to these qualities, which exist “in potentiality,” states are given as existing in actuality.  Hatred, love, and jealousy are states.  An illness—insofar as the patient grasps it as a psychophysiological reality—is a state.  In the same way, a number of characteristics that become attached to my person from outside may, insofar as I live them, become states: absence (in relation to some particular person), exile, dishonor and triumph are states.  We can see what distinguishes a quality from a state: after yesterday’s anger, my “irritability” lives on as a simple, latent disposition to get angry.  On the contrary, after Pierre’s action and the resentment I felt in relation to it, my hatred survives as an actual reality, even though my thoughts are presently occupied by another object.  In addition, a quality is an acquired or innate mental disposition that helps to qualify my person.  A state, on the contrary, is far more accidental and contingent: it is something that happens to me .  However, there are also instances that fall between states and qualities: for example, even though Pozzo di Borgo’s hatred for Napoleon did exist in fact, and represented a contingent, affective relationship between Pozzo and Napoleon I, it was constitutive of Pozzo’s person .  56 We should understand acts as all of a person’s synthetic activity, i.e., every ordering of means in view of ends—not insofar as the for-itself is its own possibilities but insofar as the act represents a transcendent psychological synthesis that the for-itself is obliged to live.  For example, the boxer’s training is an act, because it overflows and maintains the for-itself which, moreover, is actualized in and through this training.  The same goes for the scholar’s quest, the artist’s work, the politician’s election campaign.  In all cases the act, as a psychological being, represents a transcendent existence and the objective face of the for-itself’s relation with the world.  (2) The term “Psychological” applies exclusively to a special category of cognitive acts: the acts of the reflective for-itself.  At the unreflective level, the for-itself is its own possibilities in a non-thetic mode and, as its possibilities are possible presences to the world beyond the world’s given state, what is thetically, but not thematically, revealed through them is a state of the world that is synthetically connected to its given state.  In consequence, the changes to be made to the world are thetically given, within the things that are present, as objective potentialities to be actualized by using our body as the instrument of their actualization.  In this way, an angry man may see in his interlocutor’s face the objective quality of asking for a punch.  That allows us to describe someone’s face as “needing a slap” or “asking to be attacked,” etc.  57 Here our body merely resembles a medium in a trance.  58 Through it, a specific potentiality of things is to be actualized (a drink-to-be-drunk, aid-to-be-brought, a harmful-animal-to-be-wiped-out, etc.); the reflection that arises in these circumstances grasps the for-itself’s ontological relation to its possibles, but as an object .  In this way, the act arises as a virtual object of reflective consciousness.  It is therefore impossible for me to be conscious at the same time, and at the same level, of Pierre and of my friendly feelings toward him: these two existences are always separated by a dimension of for-itself.  And this for-itself is, itself, a hidden reality: in the case of unreflected consciousness, it exists, but non-thetically, and it is hidden by the worldly object and its potentialities.  And in the case where reflection arises, the for-itself is surpassed toward the virtual object that the reflective consciousness has to be.  Only a pure reflective consciousness can disclose the reflected for-itself in its reality.  We will refer to the organized totality of these existents, which constantly accompany impure reflection and are the natural object of psychological investigation, as the “ psychè .” (3) Although they are virtual, these objects are not abstractions: reflective consciousness does not aim at them emptily; instead, they are given as the concrete in-itself that reflective consciousness has to be, beyond what it reflects on.  We will refer to the immediate presence “in person” to reflective consciousness of hatred, exile, or methodic doubt as “ evidence .” 59 To be convinced that this presence exists, we need only remind ourselves of cases in our personal experience when we have tried to remember a love that has died, or a certain intellectual atmosphere, lived through in our past.  In these different cases we had a distinct consciousness of aiming at these different objects emptily .  We may have been able to form specific concepts of them, or to attempt a literary description, but we knew they were not there.  Similarly, there are periods of intermittence within a living love, in which we know we are in love but we do not feel it.  Proust described these “intermittences of the heart” very well.  In contrast, it is possible to grasp a love fully, to contemplate it.  But for that, a specific mode of being of the reflected for-itself is required: it is through my liking him in the moment—which has been reflected on by my reflective consciousness—that I am able to apprehend my friendly feelings for Pierre.  In short, the only way of presentifying these qualities, states, or acts is by apprehending them through a reflected consciousness, whose shadow they cast into the in-itself, in which they are objectified.  But this possibility of presentifying a love demonstrates, better than any argument, the psyche’s transcendence.  When I suddenly discover my love, when I see it, I also grasp it as standing before consciousness.  I am able to take up points of view on it, to judge it; I am not committed within it like reflective consciousness in relation to what it reflects on.  By virtue of this very fact, I apprehend it as not being akin to the for-itself.  It is infinitely heavier, more opaque, more solid than that absolute transparency.  That is why the evidence with which psychological facts are given to intuition in impure reflection is not apodictic.  Indeed there is a gap between the reflected for-itself’s future—which is constantly eaten into and made lighter by my freedom—and my love’s dense and threatening future, which is the source of its meaning precisely as love .  If I did not in fact grasp, within the psychological object, that its future as love was settled, would it still be love? Would it not descend to the level of whim ? And doesn’t even a whim commit the future, to the extent that it is given as having to remain a whim, and never to change into love? In this way, the for-itself’s constantly nihilated future precludes any in itself determination of the for-itself as a for-itself who loves or hates; and the projected shadow of the reflected for-itself naturally possesses a future that has become degraded into in-itself, and that fuses with it to determine its meaning.  But, correlatively with the continual nihilation of the reflected futures, the psychological structure that includes its future remains only probable .  And by that we should not understand some external quality deriving from its relation to my knowledge and which is able to be transformed—should the occasion arise—into certainty, but an ontological characteristic.  (4) The psychological object, as the shadow cast by the reflected for-itself, possesses the characteristics of consciousness in degraded form.  In particular, whereas the for-itself makes itself exist in the diasporic unity of a detotalized totality, it appears as a complete and probable totality.  In other words, the psyche, which is apprehended through the three ecstatic dimensions of temporality, appears as being constituted through the synthesis of a Past, a Present, and a Future.  A love, or an undertaking, is the organized unity of these three dimensions.  It is not enough to say, in effect, that a love “has” a future, as if the future were external to the object it characterizes: rather, the future is part of the organized form of the flow that is “love,” because its being in the future is what gives love its meaning as love.  But because it is in-itself, the psyche’s present cannot be flight, nor can its future be pure possibility.  In these forms of flow there is an essential priority of the past—i.e., what the for-itself was —that already presupposes the for-itself’s transformation into in-itself.  The reflective consciousness projects a psyche with three temporal dimensions, but it constitutes these three dimensions solely out of what it reflects on was .  The future already is : How else could my love be love? Only it is not yet given : it is a “now” that has not yet been disclosed.  Therefore it loses its character as a possibility-that-I-have-to-be : my love and my joy do not have their future to be ; they are it, in the tranquil indifference of juxtaposition, just as this fountain pen is at the same time its nib and, over there, its cap.  Similarly, the present is grasped in its real quality of being-there .  Only this being-there is constituted into a having-been-there.  The present is already entirely constituted, and armed from head to toe; it is a “now” that the instant brings and takes away, like a ready-made suit; it is a card that is taken out of the game, and then put back.  The “now,” in its transition from the future to the present, and from the present to the past, does not undergo any modification, since in any case—whether it is future or not—it is already in the past.  The naïve recourse of psychologists to the unconscious, in order to distinguish the three “nows” of the psyche, illustrates this well: the now that is present to consciousness is called the “ present .” The past or future “nows” have exactly the same characteristics but are waiting in limbo in the unconscious, and if we examine them in this undifferentiated environment, we will be unable to tell the past from the future: a memory surviving within the unconscious is a past “now” and, at the same time, a future “now” insofar as it awaits its evocation.  In this way, the psyche’s form is not to be : it is already made ; it is already entirely past, present, and future, in the mode of “ has been .” Nothing remains for the “nows” that compose it but to undergo, one at a time, the baptism of consciousness, before they return to the past.  Consequently, two contradictory modalities of being coexist within the form of the psyche, since it is already made and appears in the cohesive unity of an organism and—at the same time—it can exist only through a succession of “nows,” of which each one tends toward its own isolation in the in-itself.  This joy, for example, moves from one instant to the other because its future already exists as the final culmination and given meaning of its development—not as what it has to be but as what it already “has been,” in the future.  In point of fact, the psyche’s inner cohesion is nothing but the for-itself’s unity of being, hypostasized within the in-itself.  A hatred has no parts: it is not a sum of ways of behaving and acts of consciousness; instead it is given, through ways of behaving and acts of consciousness, as the temporal unity, without any parts, of their appearances.  But here the for-itself’s unity of being is explained by the ecstatic character of its being: it has to be, fully spontaneously, what it will be.  The psyche, on the contrary, “is-been,” which means it is incapable of determining itself by itself to exist.  It is maintained before reflective consciousness by a kind of inertia, and psychologists have often emphasized its “pathological” character.  It is in this sense that Descartes is able to talk of the “passions of the soul”; it is this inertia that makes it possible to grasp the psyche in relation to existents in the world, even though it is not on the same plane of being as those existents.  60 A love is given as having been “provoked” by the loved object.  The result is that the psychological form’s total cohesion becomes unintelligible, because it does not have this cohesion to be , because it is not its own synthesis, because its unity has the character of something given.  To the extent to which a hatred is a given succession of ready-made and inert “nows,” we can find within it the seeds of infinite divisibility.  And yet this divisibility is concealed and denied, insofar as the psyche is an objectification of the for-itself’s ontological unity.  Hence there is a kind of magical cohesion between the hatred’s successive “nows,” which are given as parts only in order subsequently to negate their externality.  This ambiguity is exposed by Bergson’s theory of an enduring consciousness as a “multiplicity of interpenetration.” What Bergson arrives at here is the psyche, and not consciousness conceived as the for-itself.  Indeed, what can “interpenetration” mean? Not the absence, as a matter of principle, of any divisibility.  For there to be interpenetration, there must be interpenetrating parts.  But these parts, which by rights ought to sink back into isolation, flow into each other through a magical cohesion that is wholly unexplained, and this total fusion has hitherto defied analysis.  Bergson has no intention of founding this property of the psyche on any absolute structure of the for-itself: he registers it as something given; it is a mere “intuition” that reveals the psyche to him as an internalized multiplicity.  Its character of inertia, as a passive datum , is further accentuated by its existing without being for a consciousness, thetic or not.  It is, without any consciousness (of) being, since, in the natural attitude, man misconceives it entirely, and a recourse to intuition is required to grasp it.  In the same way, an object of the world may exist without being seen, and disclose itself later, when we have forged the necessary instruments to detect it.  For Bergson, the characteristics of psychological duration are a pure contingent fact of experience: they are that way because that is how we encounter them, and that is all there is to be said.  Psychological temporality, therefore, is an inert datum , quite similar to Bergson’s duration, which undergoes its inner cohesion without creating it, and is constantly temporalized without temporalizing itself , and whose irrational and magical de facto interpenetration of elements that are not united by any ecstatic relation of being can be compared only to the magical action of a spell working across a distance, and conceals a multiplicity of ready-made “nows.” And these characteristics do not have their source in a mistake of psychologists or a lack of knowledge; they are constitutive of psychological temporality, a hypostasis of original temporality.  The psyche’s absolute unity is the projection of the for-itself’s ontological and ecstatic unity.  But as this projection is made into the in-itself—that is what it is in the proximity without distance of identity—the ecstatic unity is fragmented into an infinity of “nows” that are what they are and which, precisely for that reason, tend to become isolated in their in-itself-identity.  Thus psychological temporality, participating at the same time in the in-itself and the for-itself, harbors a contradiction that is not overcome.  And we ought not to be surprised: as a product of impure reflection, it will naturally “ be been ” what it is not, and not be what it “is-been.” An examination of the relations which psychological forms maintain with each other within psychological time will render this still more apparent.  We should note, first, that the connections between our feelings—for example, within a complex psychological form—are genuinely subject to interpenetration.  We all know those feelings of friendship that are “nuanced” by envy, those hatreds that are, despite everything, “penetrated” by esteem, those amorous friendships that novelists have often described.  In addition, we unquestionably grasp a friendship nuanced by envy like a cup of coffee that contains a cloud of milk.  And this comparison is probably crude.  However, it is clear that a loving friendship is not given as a mere specification of the genus of friendship, in the way in which an isosceles triangle is a specification of the genus of triangle.  The friendship presents itself as being entirely penetrated by the love in its entirety—and yet it is not love, nor does it “turn into” love; otherwise it would lose its autonomy as friendship.  But an inert and in-itself object is constituted that our language finds it difficult to name, in which the in-itself and autonomous love is magically extended throughout the friendship, in the way in which, in the Stoic doctrine of σύγχυσις, the leg extends throughout the sea.  61 But psychological processes also imply the action across a distance of earlier forms on later forms.  We cannot conceive of this action at a distance on the model of simple causality that we find, for example, in classical mechanics, where the wholly inert existence of a moving body, contained within an instant, is assumed.  Nor can we conceive of it on the model of physical causality, in the manner of Stuart Mill, which is defined by the constant and unconditioned succession of two states, each of which, in its own being, excludes the other.  62 Insofar as the psyche is an objectification of the for-itself, it possesses a degraded spontaneity that we apprehend as an internal and given quality of its form and which is, moreover, inseparable from its cohesive force.  It cannot therefore be given as strictly the product of some earlier form.  But, on the other hand, this spontaneity cannot determine itself in existence, since we grasp it only as one determination among others of a given existent.  It follows that the earlier form has to give birth—across a distance—to a form of the same kind, which spontaneously structures itself as a form in a flow.  Here we do not have a being that has its future and its past to be but only successions of forms that are past, present, and future; each of these, however, exists in the mode of “having-been-it” and influences the others across a distance.  This influence will become manifest either through penetration or through motivation.  In the first case, reflective consciousness apprehends as a single object two psychological objects that were at first given separately.  The result is either a new psychological object, in which each characteristic is the synthesis of two others, or an object that is in itself unintelligible, which is given as simultaneously being entirely one of these two and also entirely the other, without there being any alteration in either of them.  In motivation, on the contrary, each of the two objects remains in its place.  But a psychological object, as a structured form and a multiplicity of interpenetration, can act only in its entirety, and all at once, on an entirely different object.  The consequence is a total action by one on the other, occurring across a distance and by means of a magical influence.  For example, my humiliation yesterday is what motivates entirely my mood this morning, etc.  What demonstrates—better than any analysis—the wholly magical and irrational character of this action across a distance is the futile attempts made by intellectualist psychologists to reduce it (while remaining at the level of psychology) to a causality that intellectual analysis might make intelligible.  Thus Proust constantly tries to find, through his intellectualist dissection of psychological states within their temporal succession, connections of rational causality between these states.  But once he has performed these analyses, all he is able to offer us is this kind of result: For once Swann could picture her Odette to himself without revulsion, could see once again the friendliness in her smile, once the desire to tear her away from every rival was no longer imposed by jealousy upon his love , that love became once again , more than anything, a taste for the sensations which Odette’s person gave him, for the pleasure he took in admiring as a spectacle, or in examining as a phenomenon, the dawn of one of her glances, the formation of one of her smiles, the emission of a particular vocal cadence.  And this pleasure, different from any other, had in the end created in him a need of her which she alone by her presence or her letters could assuage.… And so, through the chemical action of his malady , after he had created jealousy out of his love , he began again to manufacture tenderness and pity for Odette.  63 Obviously, this text is about the psyche.  In it, we can see feelings that are inherently separated and individualized, and which act upon each other.  But Proust tries to clarify these actions and to classify them, hoping thereby to make intelligible the alternatives that Swann is obliged to experience.  He does not confine himself to describing what he has been able to observe himself (the transition, through “oscillations,” from hateful jealousy to tender love); he wants to explain these observations.  What are the results of this analysis? Does it eliminate the psyche’s unintelligibility? On the contrary, we can see without difficulty that this rather arbitrary reduction of the major psychological forms into simpler elements demonstrates the magical irrationality of the relations maintained between the psychological objects.  How can jealousy “impose upon” love the “desire to tear her away from every rival?” And, once this desire is added to the love (the image here is still of a cloud of milk “added” to the coffee), how does that prevent it from becoming once again “a taste for the sensations which Odette’s person gave him?” And how can pleasure create a need? And as for love, how does it manufacture the jealousy that, in its turn, imposes on him the desire to tear Odette away from every rival? And how, once he is freed from that desire, can he once again manufacture tenderness? Here Proust is attempting to constitute a symbolic “chemistry,” but the chemical images he employs are able only to conceal motivations and actions that are irrational.  The idea is to lead us into a mechanistic interpretation of the psyche that, without being any more intelligible, completely distorts its nature.  And yet it is impossible to avoid showing us bizarre and almost human relations (creating, fabricating, adding) between the states, which allow us almost to suppose that these psychological objects are animate agents.  In Proust’s descriptions, we see the limits of intellectualist analysis appearing in every moment: its dissections and classifications can be carried out only on the surface, and against a ground of complete irrationality.  We must give up any attempt to reduce the irrationality of psychological causality: that causality is the magical degradation of an ecstatic for-itself that is its being at a distance from itself, into an in-itself that is what it is, at its place.  The action through influence, working magically across a distance, is the necessary result of this loosening of the connections within being.  The psychologist ought to describe these irrational connections and to regard them as a primary given of the psychological world.  In this way, reflective consciousness is constituted as a consciousness of duration and, in consequence, psychological duration appears to consciousness.  This psychological temporality, as the projection of original temporality into the in-itself, is a virtual being whose phantom flowing endlessly accompanies the for-itself’s ecstatic temporalization, insofar as reflection grasps this latter.  But if the for-itself remains at the unreflected level, or if impure reflection is purified, it disappears completely.  Psychological temporality resembles original temporality in that it appears as a mode of being of concrete objects, not as a preestablished framework or rule.  Psychological time is no more than the combined set of temporal objects.  But its essential difference from original temporality is that it is , whereas the latter temporalizes itself.  As such, it can be constituted only out of the past, and the future can only be a past that is to come after the present past, i.e., the empty “before-after” form has become hypostasized, and orders the relations between objects that are equally past.  At the same time, this psychological duration, unable to be through itself, must constantly be been .  This temporality, constantly oscillating between the multiplicity of juxtaposition and the absolute cohesion of the ecstatic for-itself, is composed out of “nows” that have been, and which remain at the place assigned to them, but which influence each other across a distance in their totality; that is what makes it quite similar to the magical duration of Bergsonian philosophy.  As soon as one takes up the standpoint of impure reflection—the kind of reflection that seeks to determine the being that I am—an entire world appears, to populate this temporality.  This world—a virtual presence, and the probable object of my reflective intention—is the psychological world, or psychè .  In one sense, its existence is purely ideal; in another sense, it is —since it is-been , since it is disclosed to consciousness: it is “my shadow,” what is disclosed to me when I want to see myself .  And furthermore, as it may be the basis on which the for-itself determines itself to be what it has to be (I will not go to this or that person’s house “because of” the antipathy I feel in relation to him, I decide on this or that action by taking my hatred or my love into account, I refuse to discuss politics because I know my irritable temperament, and do not want to risk becoming angry), this phantom world exists as the for-itself’s real situation .  And with this transcendent world, which takes up residence in the infinite becoming of antihistorical indifference, the temporality that we refer to as “internal” or “qualitative”—which is an objectification of original temporality into in-itself—is constituted, precisely, as a virtual unity of being.  Here we find the first draft of an “outside”; the for-itself sees itself almost conferring an “outside” on itself, in its own eyes: but this “outside” is purely virtual.  Later on we will see how being-for-the-Other actualizes the first draft of this “outside.” Simon & Schuster Back Sign-up Page We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster ebook.  Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list.  Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster.  Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read.  You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.  Copyright Washington Square Press An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.  1230 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10020 www.SimonandSchuster.com Copyright 1943 by Éditions Gallimard Foreword copyright © 2018 by Richard Moran Translator’s Introduction, Notes on the Translation, and Translator’s Footnotes copyright © 2018 by Sarah Richmond English translation copyright © 2018 by Routledge Originally published in France in 1943 as L’Être et le néant : Essai d’ontologie phénoménologique by Éditions Gallimard This English translation originally published in Great Britain in 2018 by Routledge UK All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.  For information, address Atria Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.  First Washington Square Press/Atria Paperback edition September 2021 WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS/ATRIA PAPERBACK and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.  For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com .  The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event.  For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com .  Jacket design by Donna Cheng Author photograph: Jean-Paul Sartre, 1951.  © Philippe Halsman/Magnum Photos Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.  ISBN 978-1-9821-0544-0 ISBN 978-1-9821-0545-7 (pbk) ISBN 978-1-9821-0546-4 (ebook) Cover .  Fear and Trembling Preamble from the Heart An old proverb pertaining to the outward and visible world says: ‘Only one who works gets bread.’ Oddly enough, the saying doesn’t apply in the world to which it most properly belongs, for the outward world is subject to the law of imperfection; there it happens time and again that one who gets bread is one who does not work, that one who sleeps gets it in greater abundance than one who labours.  In the outward world everything belongs to whoever has it, the outward world is subject to the law of indifference and the genie of the ring obeys the one who wears it, whether he be a Noureddin or an Aladdin, and whoever holds the world’s treasures does so however he came by them.  It is otherwise in the world of spirit.  Here there prevails an eternal divine order, here it does not rain on the just and the unjust alike, here the sun does not shine on both good and evil, here only one who works gets bread, and only one who knows anguish finds rest, only one who descends to the underworld saves the loved one, only one who draws the knife gets Isaac.  He who will not work does not get bread, but will be deluded, as the gods deluded Orpheus with an airy figure in place of the beloved, deluded him because he was tender-hearted, not courageous, deluded him because he was a lyre-player, not a man.  Here it is no help to have Abraham as one’s father, or seventeen centuries of noble ancestry; of anyone who will not work here one can say what is written about Israel’s virgins, he gives birth to wind - while the one who works will give birth to his own father.  Conventional wisdom aims presumptuously to introduce into the world of spirit that same law of indifference under which the outside world groans.  It believes it is enough to have knowledge of large truths.  No other work is necessary.  But then it does not get bread, it starves to death while everything is transformed into gold.  And what else does it know? There were many thousands in the Greece of the time, countless others in later generations, who knew all the victories of Miltiades, but there was only one who lost sleep over them.  There were countless generations that knew the story of Abraham by heart, word for word.  How many did it make sleepless? Now the story of Abraham has the remarkable quality that it will always be glorious no matter how impoverished our understanding of it, but only - for it is true here too - if we are willing to ‘labour and be heavy laden’.  But labour they will not, and yet they still want to understand the story.  One speaks in Abraham’s honour, but how? By making it a commonplace: ‘his greatness was that he so loved God that he was willing to offer him the best he had.’ That is very true, but ‘best’ is a vague expression.  In word and thought one can quite safely identify Isaac with the best, and the man who so thinks can very well puff at his pipe as he does so, and the listener can very well leisurely stretch out his legs.  If the rich young man whom Christ met on the road had sold all his possessions and given them to the poor, we would praise him as we praise all great deeds, but we would not understand even him without some labour.  Yet he would not have become an Abraham even had he given away the best he had.  What is left out of the Abraham story is the anguish; for while I am under no obligation to money, to a son the father has the highest and most sacred of obligations.  Yet anguish is a dangerous affair for the squeamish, so people forget it, notwithstanding they want to talk about Abraham.  So they talk and in the course of conversation they interchange the words ‘Isaac’ and ‘best’.  Everything goes excellently.  Should someone in the audience be suffering from insomnia, however, there is likely to be the most appalling, most profound, tragi-comic misunderstanding.  He goes home, he wants to do just like Abraham; for the son is certainly the best thing he has.  Should that speaker hear word of this, he might go to the man, summon all his clerical authority, and shout: ‘Loathsome man, dregs of society, what devil has so possessed you that you wanted to murder your own son?’ And this priest, who had felt no signs of heat or perspiration while preaching about Abraham, would be surprised at the righteous wrath with which he fulminates against that poor man; he would be pleased with himself, for never had he spoken with such pungency and fervour before.  He would say to himself, and his wife: ‘I’m an orator, all I’ve needed was the opportunity; when I spoke about Abraham on Sunday I didn’t feel at all carried away.’ If the same speaker still had some slight excess of wit to spare he would surely lose it were the sinner to reply coolly and with dignity: ‘It was in fact what you yourself preached on Sunday.’ How could a priest get such an idea into his head? And yet he did so, and the mistake was only that he hadn’t known what he was saying.  Why doesn’t some poet take up situations like these instead of the stuff and nonsense that fills comedies and novels? The comic and the tragic converge on each other here in absolute infinity.  The priest’s speech was no doubt laughable enough in itself, but became infinitely more so in its consequence, and yet that was quite natural.  Or suppose the sinner had acceded without protest to the priest’s reprimand; or that zealous cleric had gone happily home, happy in the knowledge that his effectiveness was not confined to the pulpit but was above all evident in the irresistible power of his ministry to souls, inspiring the congregation on Sunday while on Monday, like a cherub with flaming sword, confronting him who by his deed would put that old proverb to shame which says that the world never practises what the priest preaches.  1 Should the sinner, on the other hand, not be convinced, his situation would be tragic enough.  He would no doubt be executed or sent to the madhouse; in short he would have come into an unhappy relation to so-called reality, though in another sense I should think that Abraham made him happy: for he who labours does not perish.  What explains a contradiction like this speaker’s? Is it because Abraham has acquired proprietary rights to the title of great man, so that whatever he does is great, and if anyone else does the same it is a sin, a crying sin? If so, I have no wish to take part in such mindless praise.  If faith cannot make it into a holy deed to murder one’s own son, then let the judgement fall on Abraham as on anyone else.  If one hasn’t the courage to think this thought through, to say that Abraham was a murderer, then surely it is better to acquire that courage than to waste time on undeserved speeches in his praise.  The ethical expression for what Abraham did is that he was willing to murder Isaac; the religious expression is that he was willing to sacrifice Isaac; but in this contradiction lies the very anguish that can indeed make one sleepless; and yet without that anguish Abraham is not the one he is.  Or perhaps Abraham simply didn’t do what the story says, perhaps in the context of his times what he did was something quite different.  Then let’s forget him, for why bother remembering a past that cannot be made into a present? Or perhaps something to do with the ethical aspect slipped that speaker’s mind, the fact that Isaac was the son.  For if you simply remove faith as a nix and nought there remains only the raw fact that Abraham was willing to murder Isaac, which is easy enough for anyone without faith to imitate; without the faith, that is, which makes it hard.  For my own part I don’t lack the courage to think a thought whole.  No thought has frightened me so far.  Should I ever come across one I hope I will at least have the honesty to say: ‘This thought scares me, it stirs up something else in me so that I don’t want to think it.’ If that is wrong of me I’ll no doubt get my punishment.  If I had conceded the truth of the judgement that Abraham was a murderer, I am not sure that I would have been able to silence my reverence of him.  But if that is what I myself thought, then I would presumably keep quiet, for thoughts like that are not to be intimated to others.  However, Abraham is no illusion; he hasn’t slept himself to fame; he does not owe his celebrity to any whim of fate.  Can one speak unreservedly of Abraham, then, without risking that someone will go off the rails and do likewise? Unless I dare to speak quite openly I will simply keep quiet about Abraham, and above all not diminish him so that by that very fact he becomes a snare for the weak.  If one makes faith the main thing - that is, makes it what it is - then I imagine one might dare speak of it without that risk in this day of ours which can hardly be said to outdo itself in faith, and it is only in respect of faith that one achieves resemblance to Abraham, not murder.  If one makes love into a fleeting mood, into a pleasurable agitation in a person, then one lays traps for the weak when talking of the achievements of love.  Of course everyone has momentary feelings, but if those were to be used as reasons for doing the terrible things that love has hallowed as immortal deeds everything would be lost, both the achievement and those misled in this way.  It should be all right, then, to speak about Abraham.  The great can never do harm when grasped in their greatness.  It is like a two-edged sword, bringing death and salvation.  If it should fall to my lot to speak of him, I would begin by showing what a devout and God-fearing man Abraham was, deserving to be called God’s chosen.  Only such a person is subjected to such a trial; but who is such a person? Next I would describe how Abraham loved Isaac.  To that end I would beg the support of all good spirits in making my speech as fervent as is the love of a father for his son.  I would hope to describe it in such a way that not many a father in the realm would dare maintain that he loved his son thus.  Yet if he did not love as Abraham, all thought of offering Isaac would be a temptation.  Here we already have plenty to speak of for several Sundays, so there is no need to rush.  The result, if the speech does justice to the theme, will be that some fathers will simply not want to hear more, but be happy for the time being if they have really succeeded in loving as Abraham did.  Should one of them after having caught the greatness of Abraham’s deed, but also the appallingness of it, venture out on the road, I would saddle my horse and ride along with him.  At every stop before we came to the mountain in Moriah I would explain to him that he could still turn back, could rue the misunderstanding that he was called to be tried in a conflict of this nature, could confess that he lacked the courage, so that if God wanted Isaac God must take him himself.  It is my conviction that such a person will not be disavowed, but can be blessed along with all others, though not in time.  Even in times of faith would such a person not be judged in this way? I knew someone who once could have saved my life had he possessed magnanimity.  He said plainly: ‘I see well enough what I could do, but I don’t dare.  I’m afraid that later I shall lack strength, that I shall regret it.’ He was not magnanimous, but would anyone cease to love him on that account? Having spoken thus, and moved my audience so that they appreciated at least something of the dialectical struggle of faith and its gigantic passion, I would not be guilty of the error they might impute to me by thinking: ‘Well, he has faith in such a high degree it’s enough for us just to hold on to his coat-tails.’ For I would add: ‘By no means have I faith.  I am a shrewd fellow by nature, such as always have great difficulty making the movement of faith, though I wouldn’t attach any importance in itself to a difficulty which, by overcoming it, brings a shrewd fellow no further than the most ordinary and simple-minded person has already reached without the difficulty .’ Love, after all, has its priests in the poets, and occasionally one hears a voice that knows how to keep it in shape; but about faith one hears not a word, who speaks in this passion’s praises? Philosophy goes further.  Theology sits all painted at the window courting philosophy’s favour, offering philosophy its delights.  It is said to be hard to understand Hegel, while understanding Abraham, why, that’s a bagatelle.  To go beyond Hegel, that is a miracle, but to go beyond Abraham is the simplest of all.  I for my part have devoted considerable time to understanding the Hegelian philosophy, believe also that I have more or less understood it, am rash enough to believe that at those points where, despite the trouble taken, I cannot understand it, the reason is that Hegel himself hasn’t been altogether clear.  All this I do easily, naturally, without it causing me any mental strain.  But when I have to think about Abraham I am virtually annihilated.  I am all the time aware of that monstrous paradox that is the content of Abraham’s life.  I am constantly repulsed, and my thought, for all its passion, is unable to enter into it, cannot come one hairbreadth further.  I strain every muscle to catch sight of it, but the same instant I become paralysed.  I am not unacquainted with what has been admired as great and magnanimous in the world; my soul feels an affinity with it, and is in all humility convinced that it was in my cause too that the hero strove; as I contemplate his striving I exclaim to myself: ‘ Jam tua res agitur ’ Now it’s your affair that’s at stake.  The hero I can think myself into, but not Abraham; when I reach that height I fall down since what I’m offered is a paradox.  Yet I by no means think that faith is therefore something inferior, on the contrary that it is the highest, at the same time believing it dishonest of philosophy to offer something else instead and to slight faith.  Philosophy cannot and should not give us an account of faith, but should understand itself and know just what it has indeed to offer, without taking anything away, least of all cheating people out of something by making them think it is nothing.  I am not unacquainted with life’s needs and dangers, I do not fear them, and I go to meet them undaunted.  I am not unfamiliar with horror, my memory is a faithful wife and my imagination, unlike myself, a diligent maid who sits quietly all day at her work and in the evening can speak so prettily for me that I just have to look at it even if it isn’t always landscapes or flowers or pastoral idylls she paints.  I have seen horror face to face, I do not flee it in fear but know very well that, however bravely I face it, my courage is not that of faith and not at all to be compared with it.  I cannot close my eyes and hurl myself trustingly into the absurd, for me it is impossible, but I do not praise myself on that account.  I am convinced that God is love; this thought has for me a pristine lyrical validity.  When it is present to me I am unspeakably happy, when it is absent I yearn for it more intensely than the lover for the beloved; but I do not have faith; this courage I lack.  God’s love is for me, both in a direct and inverse sense, incommensurable with the whole of reality.  I am not coward enough to whimper and moan on that account, but neither am I underhand enough to deny that faith is something far higher.  I can very well carry on living in my manner, I am happy and satisfied, but my happiness is not that of faith and compared with that is indeed unhappy.  I do not burden God with my petty cares, details don’t concern me, I gaze only upon my love and keep its virginal flame pure and clear; faith is convinced that God troubles himself about the smallest thing.  In this life I am content to be wedded to the left hand, faith is humble enough to demand the right; and that it is indeed humility I don’t, and shall never, deny.  But I wonder whether all my contemporaries really are capable of making the movement of faith? Unless I am much mistaken they are more inclined to pride themselves for doing what they don’t even think me capable of, i.e.  the imperfect.  It is against my nature to do what people so often do, talk inhumanly about the great as though some thousands of years were a huge distance; I prefer to talk about it humanly as though it happened yesterday and let only the greatness itself be the distance that either exalts or condemns.  If - in the guise of tragic hero, for higher than that I cannot come - I were summoned to such an extraordinary royal progress as that to the mountain in Moriah I know very well what I would have done.  I would not have been coward enough to stay at home, nor would I have rested on the way or dawdled, or forgotten the knife to create some delay; I am fairly certain I would have been there on the dot, with everything arranged - I might even have come too early instead, so as to have done with it quickly.  But I also know what else I would have done.  The moment I mounted the horse I would have said to myself: ‘Now everything is lost, God demands Isaac, I sacrifice him, and with him all my joy - yet God is love and for me continues to be so.’ For in the temporal world God and I cannot talk together, we have no common language.  Perhaps someone or other in our time would be foolish enough, envious enough of the great, to want to suppose, and have me suppose, that had I actually done this I would have done something even greater than Abraham, for wouldn’t my immense resignation be far more idealistic and poetic than Abraham’s narrow-mindedness? And yet this is the greatest falsehood, for my immense resignation would be a substitute for faith.  Nor could I have made more than the infinite movement in order to find myself again and rest once more in myself.  Neither would I have loved Isaac as Abraham did.  The fact that I made the movement resolutely might demonstrate my courage humanly speaking, that I loved him with all my soul is a precondition without which the whole affair becomes an act of wickedness, and yet I would not have loved as Abraham loved; for then I would have held back at the very last minute, though without this meaning that I’d arrive late at the mountain in Moriah.  Further more my behaviour would have vitiated the whole story, for I would have been at a loss had I got Isaac back again.  What Abraham found the easiest of all would for me be hard, to find joy again in Isaac! For he who with all the infinity of his soul, proprio motu et propriis auspiciis on his own accord and on his own responsibility, has made the infinite movement and can do no more, that person only keeps Isaac with pain.  But what did Abraham do? He came neither too early nor too late.  He mounted the ass, he rode slowly down the path.  All along he had faith, he believed that God would not demand Isaac of him, while still he was willing to offer him if that was indeed what was demanded.  He believed on the strength of the absurd, for there could be no question of human calculation, and it was indeed absurd that God who demanded this of him should in the next instant withdraw the demand.  He climbed the mountain, even in that moment when the knife gleamed he believed - that God would not demand Isaac.  Certainly he was surprised by the outcome, but by means of a double movement he had come back to his original position and therefore received Isaac more joyfully than the first time.  Let us go further.  We let Isaac actually be sacrificed.  Abraham had faith.  His faith was not that he should be happy sometime in the hereafter, but that he should find blessed happiness here in this world.  God could give him a new Isaac, bring the sacrificial offer back to life.  He believed on the strength of the absurd, for all human calculation had long since been suspended.  That sorrow can make one demented may be granted and is hard enough; that there is a strength of will that hauls close enough to the wind to save the understanding, even if the strain turns one slightly odd, that too may be granted.  I don’t mean to decry that.  But to be able to lose one’s understanding and with it the whole of the finite world whose stockbroker it is, and then on the strength of the absurd get exactly the same finitude back again, that leaves me aghast.  But I don’t say on that account that it is of little worth; on the contrary it is the one and only marvel.  It is commonly supposed that what faith produces is no work of art but a crude and vulgar effort only for clumsier natures; yet the truth is quite otherwise.  The dialectic of faith is the most refined and most remarkable of all dialectics, it has an elevation that I can form a conception of but no more.  I can make the great trampoline leap in which I pass over into infinitude, my back is like the tight-rope walker‘s, twisted in my childhood, and so it is easy for me.  One, two, three, I can go upside down in existence, but the next is beyond me, for the marvel I cannot perform but only be amazed at.  Yes, if only Abraham, the instant he swung his leg over the ass’s back, had said to himself: ‘Now Isaac is lost, I could just as well sacrifice him here at home as journey the long road to Moriah’ - then I wouldn’t need Abraham, whereas now I bow to his name seven times and to his deed seventy.  For that is not what he did, as I can prove by the fact that he received Isaac back with joy, really heartfelt joy, that he needed no preparation, no time to adjust himself to finitude and its joy.  Had it not been thus with Abraham he may well have loved God, but he would not have had faith; for he who loves God without faith reflects on himself, while the person who loves God reflects on God.  At this extremity stands Abraham.  The last stage he loses sight of is infinite resignation.  He really does go further and comes to faith, for all these caricatures of faith, the pitiable, lukewarm apathy that thinks ‘There’s surely no need, it’s not worth worrying before the time’, the miserable hope that says ‘Who knows what may happen, it’s possible certainly’ - these distortions belong to life’s wretchedness, and these infinite resignation has already infinitely scorned.  Abraham I cannot understand; in a way all I can learn from him is to be amazed.  If one imagines one can be moved to faith by considering the outcome of this story, one deceives oneself, and is out to cheat God of faith’s first movement, one is out to suck the life-wisdom out of the paradox.  One or another may succeed, for our age does not stop with faith, with its miracle of turning water into wine; it goes further, it turns wine into water.  Would it not be best all the same to stop with faith, and is it not disturbing that everyone wants to go further? When people nowadays-as is in fact variously announced - will not stop with love, where is it they are going? To worldly wisdom, petty calculation, to paltriness and misery, to all that can put man’s divine origin in doubt? Would it not be better to remain standing at faith, and for the one who stands there to take care not to fall? For the movement of faith must be made continually on the strength of the absurd, though in such a way, be it noted, that one does not lose finitude but gains it all of a piece.  I for my part can indeed describe the movements of faith, but I cannot perform them.  When learning how to make swimming movements, one can hang in a belt from the ceiling; one may be said to describe the movements all right but one isn’t swimming; likewise I can describe the movements of faith but when I am thrown into the water, although I may be said to be swimming (for I’m not among the waders), I make other movements, I make the movements of infinity, while faith does the opposite, having performed the movements of infinity it makes those of finitude.  Lucky the one who can make those movements, he performs a marvel, and I shall never tire of admiring him.  Whether it is Abraham or the servant in Abraham’s house, whether a professor of philosophy or a poor serving-maid is for me absolutely immaterial, I look only at the movements.  But those I do indeed look at and let myself be fooled neither by myself nor by anyone else.  The knights of infinite resignation are readily recognizable, their gait is gliding, bold.  But those who wear the jewel of faith can easily disappoint, for their exterior bears a remarkable similarity to what infinite resignation itself as much as faith scorns, namely the bourgeois philistine.  In my own experience I frankly admit to having found no reliable examples, though I would not deny on that ground that possibly every other person is one.  Still, I have tried now in vain for several years to track one down.  People commonly travel the world over to see rivers and mountains, new stars, garish birds, freak fish, grotesque breeds of human; they fall into an animal stupor that gapes at existence and they think they have seen something.  I am not concerned with this.  But if I knew where such a knight of faith lived I would journey to him on foot, for this marvel concerns me absolutely.  I would not let him slip one instant, but watch every minute how he makes the movements; I would consider myself maintained for life and divide my time between looking at him and practising the movements myself, thus devoting all my time to admiring him.  As I said, I haven’t found such a one; still, I can very well imagine him.  Here he is.  The acquaintance is struck, I am introduced.  The moment I first set eyes on him I thrust him away, jump back, clasp my hands together and say half aloud: ‘Good God! Is this the person, is it really him? He looks just like a tax-gatherer.’ Yet it is indeed him.  I come a little closer, watch the least movement in case some small, incongruous optical telegraphic message from the infinite should appear, a glance, expression, gesture, a sadness, a smile betraying the infinite by its incongruity with the finite.  No! I examine him from top to toe, in case there should be some crack through which the infinite peeped out.  No! He is solid through and through.  His stance? Vigorous, it belongs altogether to finitude, no smartly turned-out townsman taking a stroll out to Fresberg on a Sunday afternoon treads the ground with surer foot; he belongs altogether to the world, no petit bourgeois belongs to it more.  One detects nothing of the strangeness and superiority that mark the knight of the infinite.  This man takes pleasure, takes part, in everything, and whenever one catches him occupied with something his engagement has the persistence of the worldly person whose soul is wrapped up in such things.  He minds his affairs.  To see him at them you would think he was some pen-pusher who had lost his soul to Italian book-keeping, so attentive to detail is he.  He takes a holiday on Sundays.  He goes to church.  No heavenly glance or any other sign of the incommensurable betrays him; if one didn’t know him it would be impossible to set him apart from the rest of the crowd; for at most his hearty, lusty psalm-singing proves that he has a good set of lungs.  In the afternoon he takes a walk in the woods.  He delights in everything he sees, in the thronging humanity, the new omnibuses, the Sound - to run across him on Strandveien you would think he was a shop-keeper having his fling, such is his way of taking pleasure; for he is not a poet and I have sought in vain to prise out of him the secret of any poetic incommensurability.  Towards evening he goes home, his step tireless as a postman’s.  On the way it occurs to him that his wife will surely have some special little warm dish for his return, for example roast head of lamb with vegetables.  If he were to meet a kindred spirit, he could continue as far as Østerport so as to converse with him about this dish with a passion befitting a restaurateur.  As it happens he hasn’t a penny and yet he firmly believes his wife has that delicacy waiting for him.  If she has, to see him eat it would be a sight for superior people to envy and for plain folk to be inspired by, for his appetite is greater than Esau’s.  If his wife doesn’t have the dish, curiously enough he is exactly the same.  On the road he passes a building-site and meets another man.  They talk together for a moment, he has a building raised in a jiffy, having all that’s needed for that.  The stranger leaves him thinking: ‘That must have been a capitalist,’ while my admirable knight thinks: ‘Yes, if it came to that I could surely manage it.’ He takes his ease at an open window and looks down on the square where he lives, at everything that goes on - a rat slipping under a board over the gutter, the children at play - with a composure befitting a sixteen-year-old girl.  And yet he is no genius; I have tried in vain to spy out in him the incommensurability of the genius.  He smokes his pipe in the evening: to see him you would swear it was the cheesemonger opposite vegetating in the dusk.  Carefree as a devil-may-care good-for-nothing, he hasn’t a worry in the world, and yet he purchases every moment that he lives, ‘redeeming the seasonable time’ at the dearest price; not the least thing does he do except on the strength of the absurd.  And yet, and yet - yes, it could drive me to fury, out of envy if for no other reason - and yet this man has made and is at every moment making the movement of infinity.  He drains in infinite resignation the deep sorrow of existence, he knows the bliss of infinity, he has felt the pain of renouncing everything, whatever is most precious in the world, and yet to him finitude tastes just as good as to one who has never known anything higher, for his remaining in the finite bore no trace of a stunted, anxious training, and still he has this sense of being secure to take pleasure in it, as though it were the most certain thing of all.  And yet, and yet the whole earthly form he presents is a new creation on the strength of the absurd.  He resigned everything infinitely, and then took everything back on the strength of the absurd.  He is continually making the movement of infinity, but he makes it with such accuracy and poise that he is continually getting finitude out of it, and not for a second would one suspect anything else.  It is said that the dancer’s hardest task is to leap straight into a definite position, so that not for a second does he have to catch at the position but stands there in it in the leap itself.  Perhaps no dancer can do it - but that knight does it.  The mass of humans live disheartened lives of earthly sorrow and joy, these are the sitters-out who will not join in the dance.  The knights of infinity are dancers too and they have elevation.  They make the upward movement and fall down again, and this too is no unhappy pastime, nor ungracious to behold.  But when they come down they cannot assume the position straightaway, they waver an instant and the wavering shows they are nevertheless strangers in the world.  This may be more or less evident, depending on their skill, but even the most skilled of these knights cannot hide the vacillation.  One doesn’t need to see them in the air, one only has to see them the moment they come and have come to earth to recognize them.  But to be able to land in just that way, and in the same second to look as though one was up and walking, to transform the leap in life to a gait, to express the sublime in the pedestrian absolutely - that is something only the knight of faith can do - and it is the one and only marvel.  Yet this marvel can so easily deceive.  I will therefore describe the movements in a particular case which can illustrate the respective relationships to reality, for it is these that everything turns on.  A young lad falls in love with a princess, the content of his whole life lies in this love, and yet the relationship is one that cannot possibly be brought to fruition, be translated from ideality into reality.  2 The slaves of misery, the frogs in life’s swamp, naturally exclaim: ‘Such love is foolishness; the rich brewer’s widow is just as good and sound a match.’ Let them croak away undisturbed in the swamp.  This is not the manner of the knight of infinite resignation, he does not renounce the love, not for all the glory in the world.  He is no trifler.  He first makes sure that this really is the content of his life, and his soul is too healthy and proud to squander the least thing on getting drunk.  He is not cowardly, he is not afraid to let his love steal in upon his most secret, most hidden thoughts, to let it twine itself in countless coils around every ligament of his consciousness - if the love becomes unhappy he will never be able to wrench himself out of it.  He feels a blissful rapture when he lets it tingle through every nerve, and yet his soul is as solemn as his who has emptied the cup of poison and feels the juice penetrate to every drop of blood - for this moment is life and death.  Having thus imbibed all the love and absorbed himself in it, he does not lack the courage to attempt and risk everything.  He reflects over his life’s circumstances, he summons the swift thoughts that like trained doves obey his every signal, he waves his rod over them, and they rush off in all directions.  But now when they all return as messengers of sorrow and explain to him that it is an impossibility, he becomes quiet, he dismisses them, he remains alone, and he performs the movement.  If what I say here has any meaning the movement must take place properly.  3 For the knight will then, in the first place, have the strength to concentrate the whole of his life’s content and the meaning of reality in a single wish.  If a person lacks this concentration, this focus, his soul is disintegrated from the start, and then he will never come to make the movement, he will act prudently in life like those capitalists who invest their capital in every kind of security so as to gain on the one what they lose on the other - in short, he is not a knight.  Secondly, the knight will have the strength to concentrate the whole of the result of his reflection into one act of consciousness.  If he lacks this focus his soul is disintegrated from the start and he will then never have time to make the movement, he will be forever running errands in life, never enter the eternal; for at the very moment he is almost there he will suddenly discover that he has forgotten something and so must go back.  The next moment he will think it possible, and that is also quite correct; but through such considerations one never comes to make the movement; rather with their help one sinks ever deeper into the mire.  So the knight makes the movement, but what movement? Does he want to forget the whole thing? Because in that too there is a kind of concentration.  No! for the knight does not contradict himself, and it is a contradiction to forget the whole of one’s life’s content and still be the same.  He has no inclination to become another, seeing nothing at all great in that prospect.  Only lower natures forget themselves and become something new.  Thus the butterfly has altogether forgotten that it was a caterpillar, perhaps it can so completely forget in turn that it was a butterfly that it can become a fish.  Deeper natures never forget themselves and never become something other than they were.  So the knight will remember everything; but the memory is precisely the pain, and yet in his infinite resignation he is reconciled with existence.  His love for the princess would take on for him the expression of an eternal love, would acquire a religious character, be transfigured into a love for the eternal being which, although it denied fulfilment, still reconciled him once more in the eternal consciousness of his love’s validity in an eternal form that no reality can take from him.  Fools and young people talk about everything being possible for a human being.  But that is a great mistake.  Everything is possible spiritually speaking, but in the finite world there is much that is not possible.  This impossibility the knight nevertheless makes possible by his expressing it spiritually, but he expresses it spiritually by renouncing it.  The desire which would convey him out into reality, but came to grief on an impossibility, now bends inwards but is not lost thereby nor forgotten.  At times it is the unconscious workings of the desire in him which awaken the memory, at others it is he himself that awakens it, for he is too proud to want to let the whole content of his life seem to have been but a fleeting affair of the moment.  He keeps this love young, and it grows with him in years and beauty.  On the other hand, he needs no finite occasion for its growth.  From the moment he made the movement the princess is lost.  He needs none of this erotic titillation of the nerves at the sight of the loved one, etc., nor does he need in a finite sense to be continually making his farewell, for his memory of her is an eternal one, and he knows very well that those lovers who are so eager to see one another one more time to say farewell are right to be eager, right to think it will be the last time; for as soon as may be they will have forgotten one another.  He has grasped the deep secret that even in loving another one should be sufficient unto oneself.  He pays no further finite attention to what the princess does, and just this proves that he has made the movement infinitely.  Here we have the opportunity to see whether the movement in the individual is proper or not.  There was a person who also believed he had made the movement, but time went by, the princess did something else, she married, say, a prince, and his soul lost the resilience of resignation.  He knew then that he had not made the movement correctly; for one who has infinitely resigned is enough unto himself.  The knight does not cancel his resignation, he keeps it, just as young as in the first instance, he never lets it go, simply because he has made the movement infinitely.  What the princess does cannot disturb him, it is only lower natures who have the law for their actions in someone else, the premisses for their actions outside themselves.  If, on the other hand, the princess is similarly disposed there will be a beautiful development.  She will then introduce herself into that order of knighthood whose members are not admitted by ballot but which anyone can join who has the courage to admit him- or herself, that order of knighthood which proves its immortality by making no distinction between man and woman.  She too will keep her love young and sound, she too will have overcome her agony, even though she does not, as the song says, ‘lie by her lord’s side’.  These two will then be suited to each other in all eternity, with such a strict-tempoed harmonia praestabilita pre-established harmony that were some moment to come, a moment with which they were nevertheless not concerned finitely, for in the finite world they would grow old - were such a moment to come which allowed their love its expression in time, then they would be in a position to begin precisely where they would have begun had they been united from the beginning.  The one, whether man or woman, who understands this can never be deceived, for it is only lower natures who imagine they are deceived.  No girl who lacks this pride really knows what it is to love, but if she is so proud, then all the world’s stratagems and ingenuity cannot deceive her.  In infinite resignation there is peace and repose; anyone who wants it, who has not debased himself by - what is still worse than being too proud - belittling himself, can discipline himself into making this movement, which in its pain reconciles one to existence.  Infinite resignation is that shirt in the old fable.  The thread is spun with tears, bleached by tears, the shirt sewn in tears, but then it also gives better protection than iron and steel.  A defect of the fable is that a third party is able to make the material.  The secret in life is that everyone must sew it for himself; and the remarkable thing is that a man can sew it just as well as a woman.  In infinite resignation there is peace and repose and consolation in the pain, that is if the movement is made properly.  I could easily fill a whole book with the various misunderstandings, awkward positions, and slovenly movements I have encountered in just my own slight experience.  People believe very little in spirit, yet it is precisely spirit that is needed to make this movement; what matters is its not being a one-sided result of dira necessitas; the more it is that the more doubtful it always is that the movement is proper.  To insist that a frigid, sterile necessity is necessarily present is to say that no one may experience death before actually dying, which strikes me as crass materialism.  Yet in our time people are less concerned with making pure movements.  Suppose someone wanting to learn to dance said: ‘For hundreds of years now one generation after another has been learning dance steps, it’s high time I took advantage of this and began straight off with a set of quadrilles.’ One would surely laugh a little at him; but in the world of spirit such an attitude is considered utterly plausible.  What then is education? I had thought it was the curriculum the individual ran through in order to catch up with himself; and anyone who does not want to go through this curriculum will be little helped by being born into the most enlightened age.  Infinite resignation is the last stage before faith, so that anyone who has not made this movement does not have faith; for only in infinite resignation does my eternal validity become transparent to me, and only then can there be talk of grasping existence on the strength of faith.  Let us now have the knight of faith make his appearance in the case discussed.  He does exactly the same as the other knight, he infinitely renounces the claim to the love which is the content of his life; he is reconciled in pain; but then comes the marvel, he makes one more movement, more wonderful than anything else, for he says: ‘I nevertheless believe that I shall get her, namely on the strength of the absurd, on the strength of the fact that for God all things are possible.’ The absurd is not one distinction among others embraced by understanding.  It is not the same as the improbable, the unexpected, the unforeseen.  The moment the knight resigned he was convinced of the impossibility, humanly speaking; that was a conclusion of the understanding, and he had energy enough to think it.  In an infinite sense, however, it was possible, through renouncing it as a finite possibility; but then accepting that possibility is at the same time to have given it up, yet for the understanding there is no absurdity in possessing it, for it is only in the finite world that understanding rules and there it was and remains an impossibility.  On this the knight of faith is just as clear; all that can save him is the absurd; and this he grasps by faith.  Accordingly he admits the impossibility and at the same time believes the absurd; for were he to suppose that he had faith without recognizing the impossibility with all the passion of his soul and with all his heart, he would be deceiving himself, and his testimony would carry weight nowhere, since he would not even have come as far as infinite resignation.  Faith is therefore no aesthetic emotion, but something far higher, exactly because it presupposes resignation; it is not the immediate inclination of the heart but the paradox of existence.  Thus that a young girl in the face of all difficulties rests assured that her desire will be fulfilled in no way means that her certainty is that of faith, even if she has been brought up by Christian parents and perhaps gone for a whole year to the pastor.  She is convinced in all her childlike simplicity and innocence.  This assurance too ennobles her nature and gives her a preternatural dimension, so that like a worker of wonders she can charm the finite powers of existence and make even stones weep, while on the other hand in her distraction she can just as well run to Herod as to Pilate and move the whole world with her pleas.  Her conviction is ever so lovable, and one can learn much from her, but one thing one does not learn from her, how to make movements.  Her certainty does not dare look the impossibility in the eye in the pain of resignation.  I can see then that it requires strength and energy and freedom of spirit to make the infinite movement of resignation; I can also see that it can be done.  The next step dumbfounds me, my brain reels; for having made the movement of resignation, now on the strength of the absurd to get everything, to get one’s desire, whole, in full, that requires more-than-human powers, it is a marvel.  But at least I can see this, that the young girl’s conviction is mere frivolity compared with a faith that is unshakeable even when it sees the impossibility.  Whenever I want to make this movement I turn giddy, at the same moment I admire it absolutely and yet in that same instant an immense anxiety seizes my soul, for what is it to test God? And yet this is the movement of faith and remains that, however much philosophy, in order to confuse concepts, will have us suppose that it has faith, however much theology wants to sell it at a bargain price.  Resignation does not require faith, for what I win in resignation is my eternal consciousness, and that is a purely philosophical movement, which I venture upon when necessary, and which I can discipline myself into doing, for every time something finite out-distances me I starve myself until I make the movement; for my eternal consciousness is my love of God, and for me that is higher than anything.  Resignation does not require faith, but it requires faith to get the slightest more than my eternal consciousness, for that more is the paradox.  The movements are often confused.  It is said that faith is needed in order to renounce everything; yes, even more strangely one hears people complain that they have lost faith and on consulting the scale to see where they are, we find curiously enough that they have come no further than the point where they should be making the infinite movement of resignation.  Through resignation I renounce everything, this movement is one I do by myself, and when I do not do it that is because I am cowardly and weak and lack the enthusiasm and have no sense of the importance of the high dignity afforded to every human being, to be his own censor, a dignity greater by far than to be Censor General for the whole Roman Republic.  This movement is one that I make by myself, so what I win is myself in my eternal consciousness, in a blessed compliance with my love for the eternal being.  Through faith I don’t renounce anything, on the contrary in faith I receive everything, exactly in the way it is said what one whose faith is like a mustard seed can move mountains.  It takes a purely human courage to renounce the whole of temporality in order to win eternity, but I do indeed win it and cannot in all eternity renounce that, for that would be a self-contradiction; but it takes a paradoxical and humble courage then to grasp the whole of temporality on the strength of the absurd, and that courage is the courage of faith.  Through faith Abraham did not renounce his claim on Isaac, through his faith he received Isaac.  That rich young man, by virtue of his resignation, should have given everything away, but once he had done so the knight of faith would have to say to him: ‘On the strength of the absurd you shall get every penny back, believe that!’ And these words should by no means be a matter of indifference to the once rich young man; for if he gave his possessions away because he was bored with them, then his resignation was in a sorry state.  Temporality, finitude is what it all turns on.  I am able by my own strength to renounce everything, and then find peace and repose in the pain; I can put up with everything even if that demon, more horrifying than the skull and bones that put terror into men’s hearts - even if madness itself were to hold up the fool’s costume before my eyes and I could tell from its look that it was I who was to put it on; I can still save my soul so long as it is more important for me that my love of God should triumph in me than my worldly happiness.  A man can still, in that last moment, concentrate his whole soul in a single glance towards the heaven from which all good gifts come, and this glance is something both he and the one he seeks understand; it means he has nevertheless remained true to his love.  Then he will calmly put on the costume.  He who lacks this romanticism has sold his soul, whether he received a kingdom for it or a paltry piece of silver.  But by my own strength I cannot get the least little thing of what belongs to finitude; for I am continually using my energy to renounce everything.  By my own strength I can give up the princess, and I shall be no sulker but find joy and peace and repose in my pain, but with my own strength I cannot get her back again, for all that strength is precisely what I use to renounce my claim on her.  But by faith, says that marvellous knight, by faith you will get her on the strength of the absurd.  Alas, this movement is one I cannot make! As soon as I want to begin it everything turns around and I flee back to the pain of resignation.  I can swim in life, but for this mysterious floating I am too heavy.  To exist in such a way that my opposition to existence expresses itself every instant as the most beautiful and safest harmony, that I cannot.  And yet it must be glorious to get the princess, I say so every instant and the knight of resignation who doesn’t say it is a deceiver, he has not had just one desire and he has not kept his desire young in its pain.  Some might find it convenient enough that the desire is no longer alive, that the smart of pain has dulled; but such people are no knights.  A free-born soul who caught himself at this would despise himself and make a fresh start, and above all not allow himself to be deceived in his soul.  And yet it must be wonderful to get the princess, and yet it is only the knight of faith who is happy, only he is heir apparent to the finite, whereas the knight of resignation is a stranger, a foreigner.  To get the princess in this way, to live in joy and happiness, in her company day in and day out - we have to allow, of course, that the knight of resignation, too, may get the princess, even though he has clearly perceived the impossibility of their future happiness - thus to live joyfully and happily in this way every moment on the strength of the absurd, every moment to see the sword hanging over the loved one’s head and yet find, not repose in the pain of resignation, but joy on the strength of the absurd - that is wonderful.  The one who does that, he is great, the only great one, the thought of it stirs my soul, which was never sparing in its admiration of greatness.  Now if everyone in my generation unwilling to stop at faith is really someone who has understood life’s horror, has grasped Daub’s meaning when he says that a soldier standing guard alone with a loaded gun by a powder magazine on a stormy night gets strange thoughts; if all those unwilling to stop at faith really are people who possess the strength of soul to grasp, and give themselves time to be alone with, the thought that what they wished was impossible; if all who are unwilling to stop at faith have really reconciled themselves in pain and been reconciled by pain; if all those unwilling to stop at faith have in addition (and unless they have done all this other they need not trouble themselves in matters of faith) performed that marvel, grasped the whole of existence on the strength of the absurd - then what I am writing is a speech in the highest praise of my generation by the least in it, by the one who could only make the movement of resignation.  But why will they not stop at faith, why do we sometimes hear of people blushing to admit they have faith? That I cannot grasp.  Should I ever come so far as to manage this movement, I’d drive thereafter with a coach-and-four.  Is it really the case, can all the bourgeois philistinism I see in life, and which I allow only my deeds and not my words to condemn, really be not what it seems? Is it really this marvel? That is certainly conceivable, for our hero of faith did indeed bear a striking resemblance to it, for our hero of faith was not even an ironist and humorist but something still higher.  A lot is said in our time about irony and humour, particularly by people who have never succeeded in practising them but who nevertheless know how to explain everything.  I am not altogether unfamiliar with these two passions, I know a little more about them than is to be found in German and German Danish compendia.  Therefore I know that these two passions differ essentially from the passion of faith.  Irony and humour reflect also upon themselves and so belong in the sphere of infinite resignation, they owe their resilience to the individual’s incommensurability with reality.  The last movement, the paradoxical movement of faith I cannot perform, be it a duty or whatever - though in fact I would be most willing to do it.  Whether anyone has the right to say this must be up to him; it is a matter between him and the eternal being who is the object of faith whether he can reach an amicable agreement in this respect.  What everyone can do, on the other hand, is perform the infinite movement of resignation, and I for my part would not think twice about pronouncing anyone a coward who thinks he can’t.  With faith it is another matter.  But what no one has the right to do is let others suppose that faith is something inferior or that it is an easy matter, when in fact it is the greatest and most difficult of all.  Some understand the story of Abraham in another way.  They praise God’s mercy for giving him Isaac once again, the whole thing was just a trial.  A trial - that can say a lot or little, yet the whole thing is as quickly done with as said.  One mounts a winged horse, that very instant one is on the mountain in Moriah, the same instant one sees the ram.  One forgets that Abraham rode on an ass, which can keep up no more than a leisurely pace, that he had a three-day journey, that he needed time to chop the firewood, bind Isaac, and sharpen the knife.  And yet one praises Abraham! The speaker might just as well sleep until fifteen minutes before speaking, his hearer might just as well sleep throughout the speech, since it all goes so smoothly, without trouble from either side.  Should someone present be suffering from insomnia, that person might go home, sit down in a corner, and think: ‘It’s all over in a second, if you’ll just wait a minute you’ll see the ram and the trial is over.’ Were the speaker to meet him in that state then I imagine he would advance on him in all his dignity and say: ‘Wretch, that you can let your soul sink into such folly; there is no miracle, and all life is a trial.’ The more effusive the speaker became the more heated he would grow and the better pleased with himself, and while he had noticed no congestion of the blood when speaking about Abraham, he could now feel the vein swelling on his forehead.  He might perhaps be struck dumb were the sinner, calmly and with dignity, to reply: ‘But that’s what you preached last Sunday.’ So let us either forget all about Abraham or learn how to be horrified at the monstrous paradox which is the significance of his life, so that we can understand that our time like any other can be glad if it has faith.  If Abraham is not a nonentity, a ghost, a piece of pomp one uses to pass time away, the mistake can never lie in the sinner’s wanting to do like him; rather it is a question of seeing the greatness of Abraham’s deed, so that the person may judge for himself whether he has the inclination and courage to be tried in such a thing.  The comic contradiction in the speaker’s behaviour was that he made Abraham into something insignificant and yet would forbid the other from carrying on in the same manner.  Should one perhaps not dare to speak about Abraham? I think one should.  If I myself were to talk about him I would first depict the pain of the trial.  For that I would suck all the fear, distress, and torment out of the father’s suffering, like a leech, in order to be able to describe all that Abraham suffered while still believing.  I would remind people that the journey lasted three days and well into the fourth; yes, those three-and-a-half days should be infinitely longer than the two thousand years separating me from Abraham.  Then I would remind them that everyone, as I believe, should feel able to change their mind before beginning on such a thing, that it is possible at every moment to retract and turn back.  If one does this I see no danger; nor am I afraid of arousing a desire in people to be put to the test like Abraham.  But if one wants to market a cut-price version of Abraham and then still admonish people not to do what Abraham did, then that’s just laughable.  What I intend now is to extract from the story of Abraham its dialectical element, in the form of problemata, in order to see how monstrous a paradox faith is, a paradox capable of making a murder into a holy act well pleasing to God, a paradox which gives Isaac back to Abraham, which no thought can grasp because faith begins precisely where thinking leaves off.  Contents, The Myth of Sisyphus CONTENTS Cover About the Author Also by Albert Camus Title Page Copyright Preface THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS A N A BSURD R EASONING Absurdity and Suicide Absurd Walls Philosophical Suicide Absurd Freedom T HE A BSURD M AN Don Juanism Drama Conquest A BSURD C REATION Philosophy and Fiction Kirilov Ephemeral Creation T HE M YTH OF S ISYPHUS A PPENDIX : H OPE AND THE A BSURD IN THE W ORK OF F RANZ K AFKA Fear and Trembling Søren Kierkegaard 1813-1855 The Myth of Sisyphus, The Myth of Sisyphus THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS for PASCAL PIA Fear and Trembling Speech in Praise of Abraham If there were no eternal consciousness in a man, if at the bottom of everything there were only a wild ferment, a power that twisting in dark passions produced everything great or inconsequential; if an unfathomable, insatiable emptiness lay hid beneath everything, what would life be but despair? If it were thus, if there were no sacred bond uniting mankind, if one generation rose up after another like the leaves of the forest, if one generation succeeded the other as the songs of birds in the woods, if the human race passed through the world as a ship through the sea or the wind through the desert, a thoughtless and fruitless whim, if an eternal oblivion always lurked hungrily for its prey and there were no power strong enough to wrest it from its clutches - how empty and devoid of comfort would life be! But for that reason it is not so, and as God created man and woman, so too he shaped the hero and the poet or speech-maker.  The latter has none of the skills of the former, he can only admire, love, take pleasure in the hero.  Yet he, too, no less than the hero, is happy; for the hero is so to speak that better nature of his in which he is enamoured, though happy that it is not himself, that his love can indeed be admiration.  He is the spirit of remembrance, can only bring to mind what has been done, do nothing but admire what has been done.  He takes nothing of himself, but is jealous of his charge.  He follows his heart’s desire, but having found what he sought he wanders round to everyone’s door with his song and his speech, so that all can admire the hero as he does, be proud of the hero as he is.  That is his achievement, his humble task, this his faithful service in the hero’s house.  If he remains thus true to his love, if he struggles night and day against the wiles of oblivion, which would cheat him of his hero, then he has fulfilled his task, he is united with the hero who in his turn has loved him just as faithfully, for the poet is so to speak the hero’s better nature, ineffectual certainly as a memory is, but also transfigured as a memory is.  Therefore no one who was great will be forgotten: and however long it takes, even if a cloud of misunderstanding should take the hero away, his lover still comes, and the more time goes by the more faithfully he sticks by him.  No! No one shall be forgotten who was great in this world; but everyone was great in his own way, and everyone in proportion to the greatness of what he loved.  For he who loved himself became great in himself, and he who loved others became great through his devotion, but he who loved God became greater than all.  They shall all be remembered, but everyone became great in proportion to his expectancy.  One became great through expecting the possible, another by expecting the eternal; but he who expected the impossible became greater than all.  They shall all be remembered, but everyone was great in proportion to the magnitude of what he strove with.  For he who strove with the world became great by conquering the world, and he who strove with himself became greater by conquering himself; but he who strove with God became greater than all.  Thus there was strife in the world, man against man, one against thousands, but he who strove with God was greater than all.  Thus there was strife upon earth: there was he who conquered everything by his own strength, and he who conquered God by his powerlessness.  There was one who relied upon himself and gained everything, and one who, secure in his own strength, sacrificed everything; but greater than all was the one who believed God.  There was one who was great in his strength, and one who was great in his wisdom, and one who was great in hope, and one who was great in love; but greater than all was Abraham, great with that power whose strength is powerlessness, great in that wisdom whose secret is folly, great in that hope whose outward form is insanity, great in that love which is hatred of self.  It was by his faith that Abraham could leave the land of his fathers to become a stranger in the land of promise.  He left one thing behind, took another with him.  He left behind his worldly understanding and took with him his faith.  Otherwise he would surely not have gone; certainly it would have been senseless to do so.  It was by his faith that he could be a stranger in the promised land; there was nothing to remind him of what was dear, but the novelty of everything tempted his soul to sad longing.  And yet he was God’s chosen, in whom the Lord was well pleased! Yes, indeed! If only he had been disowned, cast out from God’s grace, he would have understood it better.  As it was it looked more like a mockery of himself and his faith.  There was once another who lived in exile from the beloved land of his fathers.  He is not forgotten, nor his songs of lament in which in sorrow he sought and found what he had lost.  From Abraham we have no song of lament.  It is human to complain, human to weep with one who weeps, but it is greater to have faith and more blessed to behold the believer.  It was faith that made Abraham accept the promise that all nations of the earth should be blessed in his seed.  Time went by, the possibility was still there, and Abraham had faith; time went by, it became unlikely, and Abraham had faith.  There was once another who held out an expectation.  Time went by, the evening drew near, he was not so pitiful as to forget his expectation; therefore he too should not be forgotten.  Then he sorrowed, and the sorrow did not deceive him as life had done; it did all it could for him and in the sweetness of sorrow he possessed his disappointed expectation.  It is human to sorrow with the sorrower, but greater to have faith and more blessed to behold the believer.  From Abraham we have no song of sorrow.  As time went by he did not mournfully count the days, he did not cast suspicious glances at Sarah, fearing she was growing old; he did not stay the march of the sun, so that Sarah should not grow old and with her his expectation; he did not soothingly sing to Sarah his mournful lay.  Abraham became old and Sarah was mocked in the land, and still he was God’s chosen and heir to the promise that in his seed all nations of the earth would be blessed.  Would it not be better, then, were he not God’s chosen? What is it to be God’s chosen? Is it to be denied in youth one’s youthful desire in order to have it fulfilled in great travail in old age? But Abraham believed and held firm to the promise.  Had Abraham wavered he would have renounced it.  He would have said to God: ‘So perhaps after all it is not your will that it should happen; then I will give up my desire, it was my only desire, my blessed joy.  My soul is upright, I bear no secret grudge because you refused it.’ He would not have been forgotten, he would have saved many by his example, yet he would not have become the father of faith; for it is great to give up one’s desire, but greater to stick to it after having given it up; it is great to grasp hold of the eternal but greater to stick to the temporal after having given it up.  But then came the fullness of time.  Had Abraham not had faith, then Sarah would surely have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dull with grief, instead of understanding the fulfilment, would have smiled at it as at a youthful dream.  But Abraham believed, and therefore he was young; for he who always hopes for the best becomes old, deceived by life, and he who is always prepared for the worst becomes old prematurely; but he who has faith, retains eternal youth.  All praise then to that tale! For Sarah, though stricken in years, was young enough to covet the pleasure of motherhood; and Abraham, though grey of head, was young enough to want to be a father.  Outwardly the wonder of faith is in Abraham and Sarah’s being young enough for it to happen according to their expectations; in a deeper sense the wonder of faith lies in Abraham and Sarah’s being young enough to wish, and in faith’s having preserved their wish and through it their youthfulness.  He accepted the fulfilment of the promise, he accepted it in faith, and it happened according to expectation and according to faith; for Moses struck the rock with his rod but he did not believe.  So there was rejoicing in Abraham’s house when Sarah was bride on their golden-wedding day.  But it was not to remain so; Abraham was to be tried once more.  He had fought with that subtle power that invents everything, with that watchful opponent that never takes a nap, with that old man who outlives everything - time itself.  He had fought with it and kept his faith.  Now all the horrors of the struggle were to be concentrated in one moment.  ‘And God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him ...  Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.’ So all was lost, more terrible than if it had never been! So the Lord was only making sport of Abraham! Through a miracle he had made the preposterous come true, now he would see it again brought to nothing.  Foolery indeed! But Abraham did not laugh at it, as Sarah had laughed when the promise had first been proclaimed.  All was lost! Seventy years’ faithful expectation, the brief joy at faith’s fulfilment.  Who is it then that snatches the staff from the old man, who is it that demands that the old man himself should break it? Who is it that makes a man’s grey hairs forlorn, who is it that demands that he himself should make them so? Is there no compassion for this venerable greybeard, none for the innocent child? And yet Abraham was God’s chosen, and it was the Lord who put him to this test.  All was now surely lost! The glorious memory of the human race, the promise in Abraham’s seed, it was only a whim, a fleeting thought of the Lord‘s, which Abraham himself must now eradicate.  That glorious treasure, as old as the faith in Abraham’s heart, many many years older than Isaac, the fruit of Abraham’s life, hallowed with prayers, ripened in struggle - the blessing on Abraham’s lips, this fruit was now to be plucked out of season and have no meaning; for what meaning could there be in it if Isaac was to be sacrificed! That sad yet still blessed hour when Abraham should take leave of everything he held dear, when he should raise his venerable head one time more, when his countenance should be radiant as the Lord’s, when he should concentrate his whole soul in a blessing with the power to give Isaac joy all his days - that moment was not to come! For, yes, Abraham would indeed take leave of Isaac, but it was he that was to remain; death would divide them, but Isaac was to be its victim.  The old man was not to lay his hand upon Isaac in blessing, but weary of life was to lay it upon him in violence.  And it was God who tried him.  Yes.  Woe, woe to the messenger who came before Abraham with such tidings! Who would have dared be the emissary of such sorrow? Yet it was God who tried Abraham.  But Abraham had faith, and had faith for this life.  Yes, had his faith only been for a future life it would indeed have been easier to cast everything aside in order to hasten out of this world to which he did not belong.  But Abraham’s faith was not of that kind, if there is such, for a faith like that is not really faith but only its remotest possibility, a faith that has some inkling of its object at the very edge of the field of vision but remains separated from it by a yawning abyss in which despair plays its pranks.  But it was for this life that Abraham believed, he believed he would become old in his land, honoured among his people, blessed in his kin, eternally remembered in Isaac, the dearest in his life, whom he embraced with a love for which it was but a poor expression to say that he faithfully fulfilled the father’s duty to love the son, as indeed the summons put it: ‘the son whom thou lovest.’ Jacob had twelve sons and he loved one; Abraham had just one, the son he loved.  But Abraham had faith and did not doubt.  He believed the ridiculous.  If Abraham had doubted - then he would have done something else, something great and glorious; for how could Abraham have done other than what is great and glorious? He would have marched out to the mountain in Moriah, chopped the firewood, set light to the fire, drawn the knife - he would have cried out to God: ‘Do not scorn this sacrifice, it is not the best I possess, that I well know; for what is an old man compared with the child of promise, but it is the best I can give.  Let Isaac never come to know, that he may comfort himself in his young years.’ He would have thrust the knife into his own breast.  He would have been admired in the world and his name never forgotten; but it is one thing to be admired, another to be a guiding star that saves the anguished.  But Abraham had faith.  He did not beg for himself in hope of moving the Lord; it was only that time when the just punishment had been proclaimed upon Sodom and Gomorrah that Abraham came forward with his prayers.  We read in those Holy Scriptures: ‘And God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: Abraham, where are you? but Abraham answered: here I am.’ You, to whom my speech is addressed, was that the case with you? When you saw, far off, the heavy fate approaching, did you not say to the mountains, ‘hide me’, to the hills, ‘fall on me’? Or if you were stronger, did your feet nevertheless not drag along the way? Did they not hanker, as it were, to get back into the old tracks? When you were called, did you answer, or did you not? Perhaps softly and in a whisper? Not so Abraham, gladly, boldly, trustingly he answered out loud ‘here I am’.  We read further: ‘And Abraham rose up early in the morning.’ He hurried as though to some celebration, and he was at the appointed place, the mountain in Moriah, early in the morning.  He said nothing to Sarah, nothing to Eleazar.  After all, who could have understood him? Hadn’t the test by its very nature exacted an oath of silence from him? ‘And he clave the wood, he bound Isaac, he kindled the fire, he drew the knife.’ My hearer! Many a father has felt the loss of his child as the loss of the dearest thing he has in the world, to be bereft of every hope for the future; yet no son was the child of promise in the sense that Isaac was for Abraham.  Many a father has lost his child, but then it was God, the unchangeable and inscrutable will of the Almighty, it was his hand that took it.  Not so with Abraham.  For him a harder trial was reserved; along with the knife the fate of Isaac was put into Abraham’s own hand.  And he stood there, the old man with his only hope! But he did not doubt, he did not look in anguish to left or right, he did not challenge heaven with his prayers.  He knew it was God the Almighty that tried him, he knew it was the hardest sacrifice that could be demanded of him; but he also knew that no sacrifice was too hard when God demanded it - and he drew the knife.  Who gave strength to Abraham’s arm, who kept his right arm raised so that it did not fall helplessly down! Anyone who saw this would be paralysed.  Who gave strength to Abraham’s soul, so that his eye did not become too clouded to see either Isaac or the ram! Anyone who saw this would become blind.  And yet rare enough though they may be, those who are both paralysed and blind, still more rare is he who can tell the story and give it its due.  We know it, all of us - it was only a trial.  Had Abraham doubted as he stood on the mountain in Moriah, had he looked about in indecision, if before drawing the knife he had accidentally caught sight of the ram and God had allowed him to offer it in place of Isaac - then he would have gone home, everything would have been as before, he would have had Sarah, he would have kept Isaac, and yet how changed! For his withdrawal would have been a flight, his deliverance an accident, his reward dishonour, his future perhaps damnation.  Then he would have borne witness, not to his faith or to God’s mercy, but to how dreadful was the journey to the mountain in Moriah.  Abraham would not be forgotten, nor the mountain.  Yet it would not be mentioned like Ararat, where the Ark came to land, but as a horror, for it was here that Abraham doubted.  Venerable Father Abraham! When you journeyed home from the mountain in Moriah you needed no speech of praise to console you for what was lost; for in fact you gained everything and kept Isaac.  Was it not so? The Lord never again took him from you, you sat happily at table with him in your tent, as you do in the hereafter in all eternity.  Venerable Father Abraham! Thousands of years have slipped by since those days, but you need no late-coming lover to snatch your memory from the power of oblivion; for every mother-tongue commemorates you - and still you reward your lover more gloriously than anyone.  You make him blessed hereafter in your bosom, you captivate his eye and his heart in the here and now with the marvel of your deed.  Venerable Father Abraham! Second father to the human race! You who first saw and bore witness to that tremendous passion that scorns the fearful struggle with the raging elements and the forces of creation in order to struggle with God instead, you who first knew that supreme passion, the sacred, pure, and humble expression of the divine madness which the pagans admired - forgive him who would speak in your praise if he did not do it correctly.  He spoke humbly, seeing it is his heart’s desire; he spoke briefly, as is fitting; but he will never forget that you needed a hundred years to get the son of your old age, against every expectation, that you had to draw the knife before keeping Isaac; he will never forget that in one hundred and thirty years you got no further than faith.  An Absurd Reasoning, The Myth of Sisyphus AN ABSURD REASONING Absurdity and Suicide T HERE is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide.  Judging whether life is or is not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.  All the rest—whether or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind has nine or twelve categories—comes afterwards.  These are games; one must first answer.  And if it is true, as Nietzsche claims, that a philosopher, to deserve our respect, must preach by example, you can appreciate the importance of that reply, for it will precede the definitive act.  These are facts the heart can feel; yet they call for careful study before they become clear to the intellect.  If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more urgent than that, I reply that one judges by the actions it entails.  I have never seen anyone die for the ontological argument.  Galileo, who held a scientific truth of great importance, abjured it with the greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life.  In a certain sense, he did right.  *1 That truth was not worth the stake.  Whether the earth or the sun revolves around the other is a matter of profound indifference.  To tell the truth, it is a futile question.  On the other hand, I see many people die because they judge that life is not worth living.  I see others paradoxically getting killed for the ideas or illusions that give them a reason for living (what is called a reason for living is also an excellent reason for dying).  I therefore conclude that the meaning of life is the most urgent of questions.  How to answer it? On all essential problems (I mean thereby those that run the risk of leading to death or those that intensify the passion of living) there are probably but two methods of thought: the method of La Palisse and the method of Don Quixote.  Solely the balance between evidence and lyricism can allow us to achieve simultaneously emotion and lucidity.  In a subject at once so humble and so heavy with emotion, the learned and classical dialectic must yield, one can see, to a more modest attitude of mind deriving at one and the same time from common sense and understanding.  Suicide has never been dealt with except as a social phenomenon.  On the contrary, we are concerned here, at the outset, with the relationship between individual thought and suicide.  An act like this is prepared within the silence of the heart, as is a great work of art.  The man himself is ignorant of it.  One evening he pulls the trigger or jumps.  Of an apartment-building manager who had killed himself I was told that he had lost his daughter five years before, that he had changed greatly since, and that that experience had “undermined” him.  A more exact word cannot be imagined.  Beginning to think is beginning to be undermined.  Society has but little connection with such beginnings.  The worm is in man’s heart.  That is where it must be sought.  One must follow and understand this fatal game that leads from lucidity in the face of existence to flight from light.  There are many causes for a suicide, and generally the most obvious ones were not the most powerful.  Rarely is suicide committed (yet the hypothesis is not excluded) through reflection.  What sets off the crisis is almost always unverifiable.  Newspapers often speak of “personal sorrows” or of “incurable illness.” These explanations are plausible.  But one would have to know whether a friend of the desperate man had not that very day addressed him indifferently.  He is the guilty one.  For that is enough to precipitate all the rancors and all the boredom still in suspension.  *2 But if it is hard to fix the precise instant, the subtle step when the mind opted for death, it is easier to deduce from the act itself the consequences it implies.  In a sense, and as in melodrama, killing yourself amounts to confessing.  It is confessing that life is too much for you or that you do not understand it.  Let’s not go too far in such analogies, however, but rather return to everyday words.  It is merely confessing that that “is not worth the trouble.” Living, naturally, is never easy.  You continue making the gestures commanded by existence for many reasons, the first of which is habit.  Dying voluntarily implies that you have recognized, even instinctively, the ridiculous character of that habit, the absence of any profound reason for living, the insane character of that daily agitation, and the uselessness of suffering.  What, then, is that incalculable feeling that deprives the mind of the sleep necessary to life? A world that can be explained even with bad reasons is a familiar world.  But, on the other hand, in a universe suddenly divested of illusions and lights, man feels an alien, a stranger.  His exile is without remedy since he is deprived of the memory of a lost home or the hope of a promised land.  This divorce between man and his life, the actor and his setting, is properly the feeling of absurdity.  All healthy men having thought of their own suicide, it can be seen, without further explanation, that there is a direct connection between this feeling and the longing for death.  The subject of this essay is precisely this relationship between the absurd and suicide, the exact degree to which suicide is a solution to the absurd.  The principle can be established that for a man who does not cheat, what he believes to be true must determine his action.  Belief in the absurdity of existence must then dictate his conduct.  It is legitimate to wonder, clearly and without false pathos, whether a conclusion of this importance requires forsaking as rapidly as possible an incomprehensible condition.  I am speaking, of course, of men inclined to be in harmony with themselves.  Stated clearly, this problem may seem both simple and insoluble.  But it is wrongly assumed that simple questions involve answers that are no less simple and that evidence implies evidence.  A priori and reversing the terms of the problem, just as one does or does not kill oneself, it seems that there are but two philosophical solutions, either yes or no.  This would be too easy.  But allowance must be made for those who, without concluding, continue questioning.  Here I am only slightly indulging in irony: this is the majority.  I notice also that those who answer “no” act as if they thought “yes.” As a matter of fact, if I accept the Nietzschean criterion, they think “yes” in one way or another.  On the other hand, it often happens that those who commit suicide were assured of the meaning of life.  These contradictions are constant.  It may even be said that they have never been so keen as on this point where, on the contrary, logic seems so desirable.  It is a commonplace to compare philosophical theories and the behavior of those who profess them.  But it must be said that of the thinkers who refused a meaning to life none except Kirilov who belongs to literature, Peregrinos who is born of legend, *3 and Jules Lequier who belongs to hypothesis, admitted his logic to the point of refusing that life.  Schopenhauer is often cited, as a fit subject for laughter, because he praised suicide while seated at a well-set table.  This is no subject for joking.  That way of not taking the tragic seriously is not so grievous, but it helps to judge a man.  In the face of such contradictions and obscurities must we conclude that there is no relationship between the opinion one has about life and the act one commits to leave it? Let us not exaggerate in this direction.  In a man’s attachment to life there is something stronger than all the ills in the world.  The body’s judgment is as good as the mind’s, and the body shrinks from annihilation.  We get into the habit of living before acquiring the habit of thinking.  In that race which daily hastens us toward death, the body maintains its irreparable lead.  In short, the essence of that contradiction lies in what I shall call the act of eluding because it is both less and more than diversion in the Pascalian sense.  Eluding is the invariable game.  The typical act of eluding, the fatal evasion that constitutes the third theme of this essay, is hope.  Hope of another life one must “deserve” or trickery of those who live not for life itself but for some great idea that will transcend it, refine it, give it a meaning, and betray it.  Thus everything contributes to spreading confusion.  Hitherto, and it has not been wasted effort, people have played on words and pretended to believe that refusing to grant a meaning to life necessarily leads to declaring that it is not worth living.  In truth, there is no necessary common measure between these two judgments.  One merely has to refuse to be misled by the confusions, divorces, and inconsistencies previously pointed out.  One must brush everything aside and go straight to the real problem.  One kills oneself because life is not worth living, that is certainly a truth—yet an unfruitful one because it is a truism.  But does that insult to existence, that flat denial in which it is plunged come from the fact that it has no meaning? Does its absurdity require one to escape it through hope or suicide—this is what must be clarified, hunted down, and elucidated while brushing aside all the rest.  Does the Absurd dictate death? This problem must be given priority over others, outside all methods of thought and all exercises of the disinterested mind.  Shades of meaning, contradictions, the psychology that an “objective” mind can always introduce into all problems have no place in this pursuit and this passion.  It calls simply for an unjust—in other words, logical—thought.  That is not easy.  It is always easy to be logical.  It is almost impossible to be logical to the bitter end.  Men who die by their own hand consequently follow to its conclusion their emotional inclination.  Reflection on suicide gives me an opportunity to raise the only problem to interest me: is there a logic to the point of death? I cannot know unless I pursue, without reckless passion, in the sole light of evidence, the reasoning of which I am here suggesting the source.  This is what I call an absurd reasoning.  Many have begun it.  I do not yet know whether or not they kept to it.  When Karl Jaspers, revealing the impossibility of constituting the world as a unity, exclaims: “This limitation leads me to myself, where I can no longer withdraw behind an objective point of view that I am merely representing, where neither I myself nor the existence of others can any longer become an object for me,” he is evoking after many others those waterless deserts where thought reaches its confines.  After many others, yes indeed, but how eager they were to get out of them! At that last crossroad where thought hesitates, many men have arrived and even some of the humblest.  They then abdicated what was most precious to them, their life.  Others, princes of the mind, abdicated likewise, but they initiated the suicide of their thought in its purest revolt.  The real effort is to stay there, rather, in so far as that is possible, and to examine closely the odd vegetation of those distant regions.  Tenacity and acumen are privileged spectators of this inhuman show in which absurdity, hope, and death carry on their dialogue.  The mind can then analyze the figures of that elementary yet subtle dance before illustrating them and reliving them itself.  Absurd Walls Like great works, deep feelings always mean more than they are conscious of saying.  The regularity of an impulse or a repulsion in a soul is encountered again in habits of doing or thinking, is reproduced in consequences of which the soul itself knows nothing.  Great feelings take with them their own universe, splendid or abject.  They light up with their passion an exclusive world in which they recognize their climate.  There is a universe of jealousy, of ambition, of selfishness, or of generosity.  A universe—in other words, a metaphysic and an attitude of mind.  What is true of already specialized feelings will be even more so of emotions basically as indeterminate, simultaneously as vague and as “definite,” as remote and as “present” as those furnished us by beauty or aroused by absurdity.  At any streetcorner the feeling of absurdity can strike any man in the face.  As it is, in its distressing nudity, in its light without effulgence, it is elusive.  But that very difficulty deserves reflection.  It is probably true that a man remains forever unknown to us and that there is in him something irreducible that escapes us.  But practically I know men and recognize them by their behavior, by the totality of their deeds, by the consequences caused in life by their presence.  Likewise, all those irrational feelings which offer no purchase to analysis.  I can define them practically , appreciate them practically , by gathering together the sum of their consequences in the domain of the intelligence, by seizing and noting all their aspects, by outlining their universe.  It is certain that apparently, though I have seen the same actor a hundred times, I shall not for that reason know him any better personally.  Yet if I add up the heroes he has personified and if I say that I know him a little better at the hundredth character counted off, this will be felt to contain an element of truth.  For this apparent paradox is also an apologue.  There is a moral to it.  It teaches that a man defines himself by his make-believe as well as by his sincere impulses.  There is thus a lower key of feelings, inaccessible in the heart but partially disclosed by the acts they imply and the attitudes of mind they assume.  It is clear that in this way I am defining a method.  But it is also evident that that method is one of analysis and not of knowledge.  For methods imply metaphysics; unconsciously they disclose conclusions that they often claim not to know yet.  Similarly, the last pages of a book are already contained in the first pages.  Such a link is inevitable.  The method defined here acknowledges the feeling that all true knowledge is impossible.  Solely appearances can be enumerated and the climate make itself felt.  Perhaps we shall be able to overtake that elusive feeling of absurdity in the different but closely related worlds of intelligence, of the art of living, or of art itself.  The climate of absurdity is in the beginning.  The end is the absurd universe and that attitude of mind which lights the world with its true colors to bring out the privileged and implacable visage which that attitude has discerned in it.  * * * All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous beginning.  Great works are often born on a streetcorner or in a restaurant’s revolving door.  So it is with absurdity.  The absurd world more than others derives its nobility from that abject birth.  In certain situations, replying “nothing” when asked what one is thinking about may be pretense in a man.  Those who are loved are well aware of this.  But if that reply is sincere, if it symbolizes that odd state of soul in which the void becomes eloquent, in which the chain of daily gestures is broken, in which the heart vainly seeks the link that will connect it again, then it is as it were the first sign of absurdity.  It happens that the stage sets collapse.  Rising, streetcar, four hours in the office or the factory, meal, streetcar, four hours of work, meal, sleep, and Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday and Saturday according to the same rhythm—this path is easily followed most of the time.  But one day the “why” arises and everything begins in that weariness tinged with amazement.  “Begins”—this is important.  Weariness comes at the end of the acts of a mechanical life, but at the same time it inaugurates the impulse of consciousness.  It awakens consciousness and provokes what follows.  What follows is the gradual return into the chain or it is the definitive awakening.  At the end of the awakening comes, in time, the consequence: suicide or recovery.  In itself weariness has something sickening about it.  Here, I must conclude that it is good.  For everything begins with consciousness and nothing is worth anything except through it.  There is nothing original about these remarks.  But they are obvious; that is enough for a while, during a sketchy reconnaissance in the origins of the absurd.  Mere “anxiety,” as Heidegger says, is at the source of everything.  Likewise and during every day of an unillustrious life, time carries us.  But a moment always comes when we have to carry it.  We live on the future: “tomorrow,” “later on,” “when you have made your way,” “you will understand when you are old enough.” Such irrelevancies are wonderful, for, after all, it’s a matter of dying.  Yet a day comes when a man notices or says that he is thirty.  Thus he asserts his youth.  But simultaneously he situates himself in relation to time.  He takes his place in it.  He admits that he stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having to travel to its end.  He belongs to time, and by the horror that seizes him, he recognizes his worst enemy.  Tomorrow, he was longing for tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it.  That revolt of the flesh is the absurd.  *4 A step lower and strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the world is “dense,” sensing to what a degree a stone is foreign and irreducible to us, with what intensity nature or a landscape can negate us.  At the heart of all beauty lies something inhuman, and these hills, the softness of the sky, the outline of these trees at this very minute lose the illusory meaning with which we had clothed them, henceforth more remote than a lost paradise.  The primitive hostility of the world rises up to face us across millennia.  For a second we cease to understand it because for centuries we have understood in it solely the images and designs that we had attributed to it beforehand, because henceforth we lack the power to make use of that artifice.  The world evades us because it becomes itself again.  That stage scenery masked by habit becomes again what it is.  It withdraws at a distance from us.  Just as there are days when under the familiar face of a woman, we see as a stranger her we had loved months or years ago, perhaps we shall come even to desire what suddenly leaves us so alone.  But the time has not yet come.  Just one thing: that denseness and that strangeness of the world is the absurd.  Men, too, secrete the inhuman.  At certain moments of lucidity, the mechanical aspect of their gestures, their meaningless pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them.  A man is talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear him, but you see his incomprehensible dumb show: you wonder why he is alive.  This discomfort in the face of man’s own inhumanity, this incalculable tumble before the image of what we are, this “nausea,” as a writer of today calls it, is also the absurd.  Likewise the stranger who at certain seconds comes to meet us in a mirror, the familiar and yet alarming brother we encounter in our own photographs is also the absurd.  I come at last to death and to the attitude we have toward it.  On this point everything has been said and it is only proper to avoid pathos.  Yet one will never be sufficiently surprised that everyone lives as if no one “knew.” This is because in reality there is no experience of death.  Properly speaking, nothing has been experienced but what has been lived and made conscious.  Here, it is barely possible to speak of the experience of others’ deaths.  It is a substitute, an illusion, and it never quite convinces us.  That melancholy convention cannot be persuasive.  The horror comes in reality from the mathematical aspect of the event.  If time frightens us, this is because it works out the problem and the solution comes afterward.  All the pretty speeches about the soul will have their contrary convincingly proved, at least for a time.  From this inert body on which a slap makes no mark the soul has disappeared.  This elementary and definitive aspect of the adventure constitutes the absurd feeling.  Under the fatal lighting of that destiny, its uselessness becomes evident.  No code of ethics and no effort are justifiable a priori in the face of the cruel mathematics that command our condition.  Let me repeat: all this has been said over and over.  I am limiting myself here to making a rapid classification and to pointing out these obvious themes.  They run through all literatures and all philosophies.  Everyday conversation feeds on them.  There is no question of reinventing them.  But it is essential to be sure of these facts in order to be able to question oneself subsequently on the primordial question.  I am interested—let me repeat again—not so much in absurd discoveries as in their consequences.  If one is assured of these facts, what is one to conclude, how far is one to go to elude nothing? Is one to die voluntarily or to hope in spite of everything? Beforehand, it is necessary to take the same rapid inventory on the plane of the intelligence.  * * * The mind’s first step is to distinguish what is true from what is false.  However, as soon as thought reflects on itself, what it first discovers is a contradiction.  Useless to strive to be convincing in this case.  Over the centuries no one has furnished a clearer and more elegant demonstration of the business than Aristotle: “The often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy themselves.  For by asserting that all is true we assert the truth of the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true).  And if one says that all is false, that assertion is itself false.  If we declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that solely ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an infinite number of true or false judgments.  For the one who expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true, and so on ad infinitum .” This vicious circle is but the first of a series in which the mind that studies itself gets lost in a giddy whirling.  The very simplicity of these paradoxes makes them irreducible.  Whatever may be the plays on words and the acrobatics of logic, to understand is, above all, to unify.  The mind’s deepest desire, even in its most elaborate operations, parallels man’s unconscious feeling in the face of his universe: it is an insistence upon familiarity, an appetite for clarity.  Understanding the world for a man is reducing it to the human, stamping it with his seal.  The cat’s universe is not the universe of the anthill.  The truism “All thought is anthropomorphic” has no other meaning.  Likewise, the mind that aims to understand reality can consider itself satisfied only by reducing it to terms of thought.  If man realized that the universe like him can love and suffer, he would be reconciled.  If thought discovered in the shimmering mirrors of phenomena eternal relations capable of summing them up and summing themselves up in a single principle, then would be seen an intellectual joy of which the myth of the blessed would be but a ridiculous imitation.  That nostalgia for unity, that appetite for the absolute illustrates the essential impulse of the human drama.  But the fact of that nostalgia’s existence does not imply that it is to be immediately satisfied.  For if, bridging the gulf that separates desire from conquest, we assert with Parmenides the reality of the One (whatever it may be), we fall into the ridiculous contradiction of a mind that asserts total unity and proves by its very assertion its own difference and the diversity it claimed to resolve.  This other vicious circle is enough to stifle our hopes.  These are again truisms.  I shall again repeat that they are not interesting in themselves but in the consequences that can be deduced from them.  I know another truism: it tells me that man is mortal.  One can nevertheless count the minds that have deduced the extreme conclusions from it.  It is essential to consider as a constant point of reference in this essay the regular hiatus between what we fancy we know and what we really know, practical assent and simulated ignorance which allows us to live with ideas which, if we truly put them to the test, ought to upset our whole life.  Faced with this inextricable contradiction of the mind, we shall fully grasp the divorce separating us from our own creations.  So long as the mind keeps silent in the motionless world of its hopes, everything is reflected and arranged in the unity of its nostalgia.  But with its first move this world cracks and tumbles: an infinite number of shimmering fragments is offered to the understanding.  We must despair of ever reconstructing the familiar, calm surface which would give us peace of heart.  After so many centuries of inquiries, so many abdications among thinkers, we are well aware that this is true for all our knowledge.  With the exception of professional rationalists, today people despair of true knowledge.  If the only significant history of human thought were to be written, it would have to be the history of its successive regrets and its impotences.  Of whom and of what indeed can I say: “I know that!” This heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it exists.  This world I can touch, and I likewise judge that it exists.  There ends all my knowledge, and the rest is construction.  For if I try to seize this self of which I feel sure, if I try to define and to summarize it, it is nothing but water slipping through my fingers.  I can sketch one by one all the aspects it is able to assume, all those likewise that have been attributed to it, this upbringing, this origin, this ardor or these silences, this nobility or this vileness.  But aspects cannot be added up.  This very heart which is mine will forever remain indefinable to me.  Between the certainty I have of my existence and the content I try to give to that assurance, the gap will never be filled.  Forever I shall be a stranger to myself.  In psychology as in logic, there are truths but no truth.  Socrates’ “Know thyself” has as much value as the “Be virtuous” of our confessionals.  They reveal a nostalgia at the same time as an ignorance.  They are sterile exercises on great subjects.  They are legitimate only in precisely so far as they are approximate.  And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and I feel its taste.  These scents of grass and stars at night, certain evenings when the heart relaxes—how shall I negate this world whose power and strength I feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine.  You describe it to me and you teach me to classify it.  You enumerate its laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are true.  You take apart its mechanism and my hope increases.  At the final stage you teach me that this wondrous and multicolored universe can be reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the electron.  All this is good and I wait for you to continue.  But you tell me of an invisible planetary system in which electrons gravitate around a nucleus.  You explain this world to me with an image.  I realize then that you have been reduced to poetry: I shall never know.  Have I the time to become indignant? You have already changed theories.  So that science that was to teach me everything ends up in a hypothesis, that lucidity founders in metaphor, that uncertainty is resolved in a work of art.  What need had I of so many efforts? The soft lines of these hills and the hand of evening on this troubled heart teach me much more.  I have returned to my beginning.  I realize that if through science I can seize phenomena and enumerate them, I cannot, for all that, apprehend the world.  Were I to trace its entire relief with my finger, I should not know any more.  And you give me the choice between a description that is sure but that teaches me nothing and hypotheses that claim to teach me but that are not sure.  A stranger to myself and to the world, armed solely with a thought that negates itself as soon as it asserts, what is this condition in which I can have peace only by refusing to know and to live, in which the appetite for conquest bumps into walls that defy its assaults? To will is to stir up paradoxes.  Everything is ordered in such a way as to bring into being that poisoned peace produced by thoughtlessness, lack of heart, or fatal renunciations.  Hence the intelligence, too, tells me in its way that this world is absurd.  Its contrary, blind reason, may well claim that all is clear; I was waiting for proof and longing for it to be right.  But despite so many pretentious centuries and over the heads of so many eloquent and persuasive men, I know that is false.  On this plane, at least, there is no happiness if I cannot know.  That universal reason, practical or ethical, that determinism, those categories that explain everything are enough to make a decent man laugh.  They have nothing to do with the mind.  They negate its profound truth, which is to be enchained.  In this unintelligible and limited universe, man’s fate henceforth assumes its meaning.  A horde of irrationals has sprung up and surrounds him until his ultimate end.  In his recovered and now studied lucidity, the feeling of the absurd becomes clear and definite.  I said that the world is absurd, but I was too hasty.  This world in itself is not reasonable, that is all that can be said.  But what is absurd is the confrontation of this irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose call echoes in the human heart.  The absurd depends as much on man as on the world.  For the moment it is all that links them together.  It binds them one to the other as only hatred can weld two creatures together.  This is all I can discern clearly in this measureless universe where my adventure takes place.  Let us pause here.  If I hold to be true that absurdity that determines my relationship with life, if I become thoroughly imbued with that sentiment that seizes me in face of the world’s scenes, with that lucidity imposed on me by the pursuit of a science, I must sacrifice everything to these certainties and I must see them squarely to be able to maintain them.  Above all, I must adapt my behavior to them and pursue them in all their consequences.  I am speaking here of decency.  But I want to know beforehand if thought can live in those deserts.  * * * I already know that thought has at least entered those deserts.  There it found its bread.  There it realized that it had previously been feeding on phantoms.  It justified some of the most urgent themes of human reflection.  From the moment absurdity is recognized, it becomes a passion, the most harrowing of all.  But whether or not one can live with one’s passions, whether or not one can accept their law, which is to burn the heart they simultaneously exalt—that is the whole question.  It is not, however, the one we shall ask just yet.  It stands at the center of this experience.  There will be time to come back to it.  Let us recognize rather those themes and those impulses born of the desert.  It will suffice to enumerate them.  They, too, are known to all today.  There have always been men to defend the rights of the irrational.  The tradition of what may be called humiliated thought has never ceased to exist.  The criticism of rationalism has been made so often that it seems unnecessary to begin again.  Yet our epoch is marked by the rebirth of those paradoxical systems that strive to trip up the reason as if truly it had always forged ahead.  But that is not so much a proof of the efficacy of the reason as of the intensity of its hopes.  On the plane of history, such a constancy of two attitudes illustrates the essential passion of man torn between his urge toward unity and the clear vision he may have of the walls enclosing him.  But never perhaps at any time has the attack on reason been more violent than in ours.  Since Zarathustra’s great outburst: “By chance it is the oldest nobility in the world.  I conferred it upon all things when I proclaimed that above them no eternal will was exercised,” since Kierkegaard’s fatal illness, “that malady that leads to death with nothing else following it,” the significant and tormenting themes of absurd thought have followed one another.  Or at least, and this proviso is of capital importance, the themes of irrational and religious thought.  From Jaspers to Heidegger, from Kierkegaard to Chestov, from the phenomenologists to Scheler, on the logical plane and on the moral plane, a whole family of minds related by their nostalgia but opposed by their methods or their aims, have persisted in blocking the royal road of reason and in recovering the direct paths of truth.  Here I assume these thoughts to be known and lived.  Whatever may be or have been their ambitions, all started out from that indescribable universe where contradiction, antinomy, anguish, or impotence reigns.  And what they have in common is precisely the themes so far disclosed.  For them, too, it must be said that what matters above all is the conclusions they have managed to draw from those discoveries.  That matters so much that they must be examined separately.  But for the moment we are concerned solely with their discoveries and their initial experiments.  We are concerned solely with noting their agreement.  If it would be presumptuous to try to deal with their philosophies, it is possible and sufficient in any case to bring out the climate that is common to them.  Heidegger considers the human condition coldly and announces that that existence is humiliated.  The only reality is “anxiety” in the whole chain of beings.  To the man lost in the world and its diversions this anxiety is a brief, fleeting fear.  But if that fear becomes conscious of itself, it becomes anguish, the perpetual climate of the lucid man “in whom existence is concentrated.” This professor of philosophy writes without trembling and in the most abstract language in the world that “the finite and limited character of human existence is more primordial than man himself.” His interest in Kant extends only to recognizing the restricted character of his “pure Reason.” This is to conclude at the end of his analyses that “the world can no longer offer anything to the man filled with anguish.” This anxiety seems to him so much more important than all the categories in the world that he thinks and talks only of it.  He enumerates its aspects: boredom when the ordinary man strives to quash it in him and benumb it; terror when the mind contemplates death.  He too does not separate consciousness from the absurd.  The consciousness of death is the call of anxiety and “existence then delivers itself its own summons through the intermediary of consciousness.” It is the very voice of anguish and it adjures existence “to return from its loss in the anonymous They.” For him, too, one must not sleep, but must keep alert until the consummation.  He stands in this absurd world and points out its ephemeral character.  He seeks his way amid these ruins.  Jaspers despairs of any ontology because he claims that we have lost “naïveté.” He knows that we can achieve nothing that will transcend the fatal game of appearances.  He knows that the end of the mind is failure.  He tarries over the spiritual adventures revealed by history and pitilessly discloses the flaw in each system, the illusion that saved everything, the preaching that hid nothing.  In this ravaged world in which the impossibility of knowledge is established, in which everlasting nothingness seems the only reality and irremediable despair seems the only attitude, he tries to recover the Ariadne’s thread that leads to divine secrets.  Chestov, for his part, throughout a wonderfully monotonous work, constantly straining toward the same truths, tirelessly demonstrates that the tightest system, the most universal rationalism always stumbles eventually on the irrational of human thought.  None of the ironic facts or ridiculous contradictions that depreciate the reason escapes him.  One thing only interests him, and that is the exception, whether in the domain of the heart or of the mind.  Through the Dostoevskian experiences of the condemned man, the exacerbated adventures of the Nietzschean mind, Hamlet’s imprecations, or the bitter aristocracy of an Ibsen, he tracks down, illuminates, and magnifies the human revolt against the irremediable.  He refuses the reason its reasons and begins to advance with some decision only in the middle of that colorless desert where all certainties have become stones.  Of all perhaps the most engaging, Kierkegaard, for a part of his existence at least, does more than discover the absurd, he lives it.  The man who writes: “The surest of stubborn silences is not to hold one’s tongue but to talk” makes sure in the beginning that no truth is absolute or can render satisfactory an existence that is impossible in itself.  Don Juan of the understanding, he multiplies pseudonyms and contradictions, writes his Discourses of Edification at the same time as that manual of cynical spiritualism, The Diary of the Seducer .  He refuses consolations, ethics, reliable principles.  As for that thorn he feels in his heart, he is careful not to quiet its pain.  On the contrary, he awakens it and, in the desperate joy of a man crucified and happy to be so, he builds up piece by piece—lucidity, refusal, make-believe—a category of the man possessed.  That face both tender and sneering, those pirouettes followed by a cry from the heart are the absurd spirit itself grappling with a reality beyond its comprehension.  And the spiritual adventure that leads Kierkegaard to his beloved scandals begins likewise in the chaos of an experience divested of its setting and relegated to its original incoherence.  On quite a different plane, that of method, Husserl and the phenomenologists, by their very extravagances, reinstate the world in its diversity and deny the transcendent power of the reason.  The spiritual universe becomes incalculably enriched through them.  The rose petal, the milestone, or the human hand are as important as love, desire, or the laws of gravity.  Thinking ceases to be unifying or making a semblance familiar in the guise of a major principle.  Thinking is learning all over again to see, to be attentive, to focus consciousness; it is turning every idea and every image, in the manner of Proust, into a privileged moment.  What justifies thought is its extreme consciousness.  Though more positive than Kierkegaard’s or Chestov’s, Husserl’s manner of proceeding, in the beginning, nevertheless negates the classic method of the reason, disappoints hope, opens to intuition and to the heart a whole proliferation of phenomena, the wealth of which has about it something inhuman.  These paths lead to all sciences or to none.  This amounts to saying that in this case the means are more important than the end.  All that is involved is “an attitude for understanding” and not a consolation.  Let me repeat: in the beginning, at very least.  How can one fail to feel the basic relationship of these minds! How can one fail to see that they take their stand around a privileged and bitter moment in which hope has no further place? I want everything to be explained to me or nothing.  And the reason is impotent when it hears this cry from the heart.  The mind aroused by this insistence seeks and finds nothing but contradictions and nonsense.  What I fail to understand is nonsense.  The world is peopled with such irrationals.  The world itself, whose single meaning I do not understand, is but a vast irrational.  If one could only say just once: “This is clear,” all would be saved.  But these men vie with one another in proclaiming that nothing is clear, all is chaos, that all man has is his lucidity and his definite knowledge of the walls surrounding him.  All these experiences agree and confirm one another.  The mind, when it reaches its limits, must make a judgment and choose its conclusions.  This is where suicide and the reply stand.  But I wish to reverse the order of the inquiry and start out from the intelligent adventure and come back to daily acts.  The experiences called to mind here were born in the desert that we must not leave behind.  At least it is essential to know how far they went.  At this point of his effort man stands face to face with the irrational.  He feels within him his longing for happiness and for reason.  The absurd is born of this confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world.  This must not be forgotten.  This must be clung to because the whole consequence of a life can depend on it.  The irrational, the human nostalgia, and the absurd that is born of their encounter—these are the three characters in the drama that must necessarily end with all the logic of which an existence is capable.  Philosophical Suicide The feeling of the absurd is not, for all that, the notion of the absurd.  It lays the foundations for it, and that is all.  It is not limited to that notion, except in the brief moment when it passes judgment on the universe.  Subsequently it has a chance of going further.  It is alive; in other words, it must die or else reverberate.  So it is with the themes we have gathered together.  But there again what interests me is not works or minds, criticism of which would call for another form and another place, but the discovery of what their conclusions have in common.  Never, perhaps, have minds been so different.  And yet we recognize as identical the spiritual landscapes in which they get under way.  Likewise, despite such dissimilar zones of knowledge, the cry that terminates their itinerary rings out in the same way.  It is evident that the thinkers we have just recalled have a common climate.  To say that that climate is deadly scarcely amounts to playing on words.  Living under that stifling sky forces one to get away or to stay.  The important thing is to find out how people get away in the first case and why people stay in the second case.  This is how I define the problem of suicide and the possible interest in the conclusions of existential philosophy.  But first I want to detour from the direct path.  Up to now we have managed to circumscribe the absurd from the outside.  One can, however, wonder how much is clear in that notion and by direct analysis try to discover its meaning on the one hand and, on the other, the consequences it involves.  If I accuse an innocent man of a monstrous crime, if I tell a virtuous man that he has coveted his own sister, he will reply that this is absurd.  His indignation has its comical aspect.  But it also has its fundamental reason.  The virtuous man illustrates by that reply the definitive antinomy existing between the deed I am attributing to him and his lifelong principles.  “It’s absurd” means “It’s impossible” but also “It’s contradictory.” If I see a man armed only with a sword attack a group of machine guns, I shall consider his act to be absurd.  But it is so solely by virtue of the disproportion between his intention and the reality he will encounter, of the contradiction I notice between his true strength and the aim he has in view.  Likewise we shall deem a verdict absurd when we contrast it with the verdict the facts apparently dictated.  And, similarly, a demonstration by the absurd is achieved by comparing the consequences of such a reasoning with the logical reality one wants to set up.  In all these cases, from the simplest to the most complex, the magnitude of the absurdity will be in direct ratio to the distance between the two terms of my comparison.  There are absurd marriages, challenges, rancors, silences, wars, and even peace treaties.  For each of them the absurdity springs from a comparison.  I am thus justified in saying that the feeling of absurdity does not spring from the mere scrutiny of a fact or an impression, but that it bursts from the comparison between a bare fact and a certain reality, between an action and the world that transcends it.  The absurd is essentially a divorce.  It lies in neither of the elements compared; it is born of their confrontation.  In this particular case and on the plane of intelligence, I can therefore say that the Absurd is not in man (if such a metaphor could have a meaning) nor in the world, but in their presence together.  For the moment it is the only bond uniting them.  If I wish to limit myself to facts, I know what man wants, I know what the world offers him, and now I can say that I also know what links them.  I have no need to dig deeper.  A single certainty is enough for the seeker.  He simply has to derive all the consequences from it.  The immediate consequence is also a rule of method.  The odd trinity brought to light in this way is certainly not a startling discovery.  But it resembles the data of experience in that it is both infinitely simple and infinitely complicated.  Its first distinguishing feature in this regard is that it cannot be divided.  To destroy one of its terms is to destroy the whole.  There can be no absurd outside the human mind.  Thus, like everything else, the absurd ends with death.  But there can be no absurd outside this world either.  And it is by this elementary criterion that I judge the notion of the absurd to be essential and consider that it can stand as the first of my truths.  The rule of method alluded to above appears here.  If I judge that a thing is true, I must preserve it.  If I attempt to solve a problem, at least I must not by that very solution conjure away one of the terms of the problem.  For me the sole datum is the absurd.  The first and, after all, the only condition of my inquiry is to preserve the very thing that crushes me, consequently to respect what I consider essential in it.  I have just defined it as a confrontation and an unceasing struggle.  And carrying this absurd logic to its conclusion, I must admit that that struggle implies a total absence of hope (which has nothing to do with despair), a continual rejection (which must not be confused with renunciation), and a conscious dissatisfaction (which must not be compared to immature unrest).  Everything that destroys, conjures away, or exorcises these requirements (and, to begin with, consent which overthrows divorce) ruins the absurd and devaluates the attitude that may then be proposed.  The absurd has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to.  * * * There exists an obvious fact that seems utterly moral: namely, that a man is always a prey to his truths.  Once he has admitted them, he cannot free himself from them.  One has to pay something.  A man who has become conscious of the absurd is forever bound to it.  A man devoid of hope and conscious of being so has ceased to belong to the future.  That is natural.  But it is just as natural that he should strive to escape the universe of which he is the creator.  All the foregoing has significance only on account of this paradox.  Certain men, starting from a critique of rationalism, have admitted the absurd climate.  Nothing is more instructive in this regard than to scrutinize the way in which they have elaborated their consequences.  Now, to limit myself to existential philosophies, I see that all of them without exception suggest escape.  Through an odd reasoning, starting out from the absurd over the ruins of reason, in a closed universe limited to the human, they deify what crushes them and find reason to hope in what impoverishes them.  That forced hope is religious in all of them.  It deserves attention.  I shall merely analyze here as examples a few themes dear to Chestov and Kierkegaard.  But Jaspers will provide us, in caricatural form, a typical example of this attitude.  As a result the rest will be clearer.  He is left powerless to realize the transcendent, incapable of plumbing the depth of experience, and conscious of that universe upset by failure.  Will he advance or at least draw the conclusions from that failure? He contributes nothing new.  He has found nothing in experience but the confession of his own impotence and no occasion to infer any satisfactory principle.  Yet without justification, as he says to himself, he suddenly asserts all at once the transcendent, the essence of experience, and the superhuman significance of life when he writes: “Does not the failure reveal, beyond any possible explanation and interpretation, not the absence but the existence of transcendence?” That existence which, suddenly and through a blind act of human confidence, explains everything, he defines as “the unthinkable unity of the general and the particular.” Thus the absurd becomes god (in the broadest meaning of this word) and that inability to understand becomes the existence that illuminates everything.  Nothing logically prepares this reasoning.  I can call it a leap.  And paradoxically can be understood Jaspers’s insistence, his infinite patience devoted to making the experience of the transcendent impossible to realize.  For the more fleeting that approximation is, the more empty that definition proves to be, and the more real that transcendent is to him; for the passion he devotes to asserting it is in direct proportion to the gap between his powers of explanation and the irrationality of the world and of experience.  It thus appears that the more bitterly Jaspers destroys the reason’s preconceptions, the more radically he will explain the world.  That apostle of humiliated thought will find at the very end of humiliation the means of regenerating being to its very depth.  Mystical thought has familiarized us with such devices.  They are just as legitimate as any attitude of mind.  But for the moment I am acting as if I took a certain problem seriously.  Without judging beforehand the general value of this attitude or its educative power, I mean simply to consider whether it answers the conditions I set myself, whether it is worthy of the conflict that concerns me.  Thus I return to Chestov.  A commentator relates a remark of his that deserves interest: “The only true solution,” he said, “is precisely where human judgment sees no solution.  Otherwise, what need would we have of God? We turn toward God only to obtain the impossible.  As for the possible, men suffice.” If there is a Chestovian philosophy, I can say that it is altogether summed up in this way.  For when, at the conclusion of his passionate analyses, Chestov discovers the fundamental absurdity of all existence, he does not say: “This is the absurd,” but rather: “This is God: we must rely on him even if he does not correspond to any of our rational categories.” So that confusion may not be possible, the Russian philosopher even hints that this God is perhaps full of hatred and hateful, incomprehensible and contradictory; but the more hideous is his face, the more he asserts his power.  His greatness is his incoherence.  His proof is his inhumanity.  One must spring into him and by this leap free oneself from rational illusions.  Thus, for Chestov acceptance of the absurd is contemporaneous with the absurd itself.  Being aware of it amounts to accepting it, and the whole logical effort of his thought is to bring it out so that at the same time the tremendous hope it involves may burst forth.  Let me repeat that this attitude is legitimate.  But I am persisting here in considering a single problem and all its consequences.  I do not have to examine the emotion of a thought or of an act of faith.  I have a whole lifetime to do that.  I know that the rationalist finds Chestov’s attitude annoying.  But I also feel that Chestov is right rather than the rationalist, and I merely want to know if he remains faithful to the commandments of the absurd.  Now, if it is admitted that the absurd is the contrary of hope, it is seen that existential thought for Chestov presupposes the absurd but proves it only to dispel it.  Such subtlety of thought is a conjuror’s emotional trick.  When Chestov elsewhere sets his absurd in opposition to current morality and reason, he calls it truth and redemption.  Hence, there is basically in that definition of the absurd an approbation that Chestov grants it.  If it is admitted that all the power of that notion lies in the way it runs counter to our elementary hopes, if it is felt that to remain, the absurd requires not to be consented to, then it can be clearly seen that it has lost its true aspect, its human and relative character in order to enter an eternity that is both incomprehensible and satisfying.  If there is an absurd, it is in man’s universe.  The moment the notion transforms itself into eternity’s springboard, it ceases to be linked to human lucidity.  The absurd is no longer that evidence that man ascertains without consenting to it.  The struggle is eluded.  Man integrates the absurd and in that communion causes to disappear its essential character, which is opposition, laceration, and divorce.  This leap is an escape.  Chestov, who is so fond of quoting Hamlet’s remark: “The time is out of joint,” writes it down with a sort of savage hope that seems to belong to him in particular.  For it is not in this sense that Hamlet says it or Shakespeare writes it.  The intoxication of the irrational and the vocation of rapture turn a lucid mind away from the absurd.  To Chestov reason is useless but there is something beyond reason.  To an absurd mind reason is useless and there is nothing beyond reason.  This leap can at least enlighten us a little more as to the true nature of the absurd.  We know that it is worthless except in an equilibrium, that it is, above all, in the comparison and not in the terms of that comparison.  But it so happens that Chestov puts all the emphasis on one of the terms and destroys the equilibrium.  Our appetite for understanding, our nostalgia for the absolute are explicable only in so far, precisely, as we can understand and explain many things.  It is useless to negate the reason absolutely.  It has its order in which it is efficacious.  It is properly that of human experience.  Whence we wanted to make everything clear.  If we cannot do so, if the absurd is born on that occasion, it is born precisely at the very meeting-point of that efficacious but limited reason with the ever resurgent irrational.  Now, when Chestov rises up against a Hegelian proposition such as “the motion of the solar system takes place in conformity with immutable laws and those laws are its reason,” when he devotes all his passion to upsetting Spinoza’s rationalism, he concludes, in effect, in favor of the vanity of all reason.  Whence, by a natural and illegitimate reversal, to the pre-eminence of the irrational.  *5 But the transition is not evident.  For here may intervene the notion of limit and the notion of level.  The laws of nature may be operative up to a certain limit, beyond which they turn against themselves to give birth to the absurd.  Or else, they may justify themselves on the level of description without for that reason being true on the level of explanation.  Everything is sacrificed here to the irrational, and, the demand for clarity being conjured away, the absurd disappears with one of the terms of its comparison.  The absurd man, on the other hand, does not undertake such a leveling process.  He recognizes the struggle, does not absolutely scorn reason, and admits the irrational.  Thus he again embraces in a single glance all the data of experience and he is little inclined to leap before knowing.  He knows simply that in that alert awareness there is no further place for hope.  What is perceptible in Leo Chestov will be perhaps even more so in Kierkegaard.  To be sure, it is hard to outline clear propositions in so elusive a writer.  But, despite apparently opposed writings, beyond the pseudonyms, the tricks, and the smiles, can be felt throughout that work, as it were, the presentiment (at the same time as the apprehension) of a truth which eventually bursts forth in the last works: Kierkegaard likewise takes the leap.  His childhood having been so frightened by Christianity, he ultimately returns to its harshest aspect.  For him, too, antinomy and paradox become criteria of the religious.  Thus, the very thing that led to despair of the meaning and depth of this life now gives it its truth and its clarity.  Christianity is the scandal, and what Kierkegaard calls for quite plainly is the third sacrifice required by Ignatius Loyola, the one in which God most rejoices: “The sacrifice of the intellect.” *6 This effect of the “leap” is odd, but must not surprise us any longer.  He makes of the absurd the criterion of the other world, whereas it is simply a residue of the experience of this world.  “In his failure,” says Kierkegaard, “the believer finds his triumph.” It is not for me to wonder to what stirring preaching this attitude is linked.  I merely have to wonder if the spectacle of the absurd and its own character justifies it.  On this point, I know that it is not so.  Upon considering again the content of the absurd, one understands better the method that inspired Kierkegaard.  Between the irrational of the world and the insurgent nostalgia of the absurd, he does not maintain the equilibrium.  He does not respect the relationship that constitutes, properly speaking, the feeling of absurdity.  Sure of being unable to escape the irrational, he wants at least to save himself from that desperate nostalgia that seems to him sterile and devoid of implication.  But if he may be right on this point in his judgment, he could not be in his negation.  If he substitutes for his cry of revolt a frantic adherence, at once he is led to blind himself to the absurd which hitherto enlightened him and to deify the only certainty he henceforth possesses, the irrational.  The important thing, as Abbé Galiani said to Mme d’Epinay, is not to be cured, but to live with one’s ailments.  Kierkegaard wants to be cured.  To be cured is his frenzied wish, and it runs throughout his whole journal.  The entire effort of his intelligence is to escape the antinomy of the human condition.  An all the more desperate effort since he intermittently perceives its vanity when he speaks of himself, as if neither fear of God nor piety were capable of bringing him to peace.  Thus it is that, through a strained subterfuge, he gives the irrational the appearance and God the attributes of the absurd: unjust, incoherent, and incomprehensible.  Intelligence alone in him strives to stifle the underlying demands of the human heart.  Since nothing is proved, everything can be proved.  Indeed, Kierkegaard himself shows us the path taken.  I do not want to suggest anything here, but how can one fail to read in his works the signs of an almost intentional mutilation of the soul to balance the mutilation accepted in regard to the absurd? It is the leitmotiv of the Journal .  “What I lacked was the animal which also belongs to human destiny….But give me a body then.” And further on: “Oh! especially in my early youth what should I not have given to be a man, even for six months…what I lack, basically, is a body and the physical conditions of existence.” Elsewhere, the same man nevertheless adopts the great cry of hope that has come down through so many centuries and quickened so many hearts, except that of the absurd man.  “But for the Christian death is certainly not the end of everything and it implies infinitely more hope than life implies for us, even when that life is overflowing with health and vigor.” Reconciliation through scandal is still reconciliation.  It allows one perhaps, as can be seen, to derive hope of its contrary, which is death.  But even if fellow-feeling inclines one toward that attitude, still it must be said that excess justifies nothing.  That transcends, as the saying goes, the human scale; therefore it must be superhuman.  But this “therefore” is superfluous.  There is no logical certainty here.  There is no experimental probability either.  All I can say is that, in fact, that transcends my scale.  If I do not draw a negation from it, at least I do not want to found anything on the incomprehensible.  I want to know whether I can live with what I know and with that alone.  I am told again that here the intelligence must sacrifice its pride and the reason bow down.  But if I recognize the limits of the reason, I do not therefore negate it, recognizing its relative powers.  I merely want to remain in this middle path where the intelligence can remain clear.  If that is its pride, I see no sufficient reason for giving it up.  Nothing more profound, for example, than Kierkegaard’s view according to which despair is not a fact but a state: the very state of sin.  For sin is what alienates from God.  The absurd, which is the metaphysical state of the conscious man, does not lead to God.  *7 Perhaps this notion will become clearer if I risk this shocking statement: the absurd is sin without God.  It is a matter of living in that state of the absurd.  I know on what it is founded, this mind and this world straining against each other without being able to embrace each other.  I ask for the rule of life of that state, and what I am offered neglects its basis, negates one of the terms of the painful opposition, demands of me a resignation.  I ask what is involved in the condition I recognize as mine; I know it implies obscurity and ignorance; and I am assured that this ignorance explains everything and that this darkness is my light.  But there is no reply here to my intent, and this stirring lyricism cannot hide the paradox from me.  One must therefore turn away.  Kierkegaard may shout in warning: “If man had no eternal consciousness, if, at the bottom of everything, there were merely a wild, seething force producing everything, both large and trifling, in the storm of dark passions, if the bottomless void that nothing can fill underlay all things, what would life be but despair?” This cry is not likely to stop the absurd man.  Seeking what is true is not seeking what is desirable.  If in order to elude the anxious question: “What would life be?” one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than resigning itself to falsehood, prefers to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard’s reply: “despair.” Everything considered, a determined soul will always manage.  * * * I am taking the liberty at this point of calling the existential attitude philosophical suicide.  But this does not imply a judgment.  It is a convenient way of indicating the movement by which a thought negates itself and tends to transcend itself in its very negation.  For the existentials negation is their God.  To be precise, that god is maintained only through the negation of human reason.  *8 But, like suicides, gods change with men.  There are many ways of leaping, the essential being to leap.  Those redeeming negations, those ultimate contradictions which negate the obstacle that has not yet been leaped over, may spring just as well (this is the paradox at which this reasoning aims) from a certain religious inspiration as from the rational order.  They always lay claim to the eternal, and it is solely in this that they take the leap.  It must be repeated that the reasoning developed in this essay leaves out altogether the most widespread spiritual attitude of our enlightened age: the one, based on the principle that all is reason, which aims to explain the world.  It is natural to give a clear view of the world after accepting the idea that it must be clear.  That is even legitimate, but does not concern the reasoning we are following out here.  In fact, our aim is to shed light upon the step taken by the mind when, starting from a philosophy of the world’s lack of meaning, it ends up by finding a meaning and depth in it.  The most touching of those steps is religious in essence; it becomes obvious in the theme of the irrational.  But the most paradoxical and most significant is certainly the one that attributes rational reasons to a world it originally imagined as devoid of any guiding principle.  It is impossible in any case to reach the consequences that concern us without having given an idea of this new attainment of the spirit of nostalgia.  I shall examine merely the theme of “the Intention” made fashionable by Husserl and the phenomenologists.  I have already alluded to it.  Originally Husserl’s method negates the classic procedure of the reason.  Let me repeat.  Thinking is not unifying or making the appearance familiar under the guise of a great principle.  Thinking is learning all over again how to see, directing one’s consciousness, making of every image a privileged place.  In other words, phenomenology declines to explain the world, it wants to be merely a description of actual experience.  It confirms absurd thought in its initial assertion that there is no truth, but merely truths.  From the evening breeze to this hand on my shoulder, everything has its truth.  Consciousness illuminates it by paying attention to it.  Consciousness does not form the object of its understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles the projector that suddenly focuses on an image.  The difference is that there is no scenario, but a successive and incoherent illustration.  In that magic lantern all the pictures are privileged.  Consciousness suspends in experience the objects of its attention.  Through its miracle it isolates them.  Henceforth they are beyond all judgments.  This is the “intention” that characterizes consciousness.  But the word does not imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of “direction”: its only value is topographical.  At first sight, it certainly seems that in this way nothing contradicts the absurd spirit.  That apparent modesty of thought that limits itself to describing what it declines to explain, that intentional discipline whence result paradoxically a profound enrichment of experience and the rebirth of the world in its prolixity are absurd procedures.  At least at first sight.  For methods of thought, in this case as elsewhere, always assume two aspects, one psychological and the other metaphysical.  *9 Thereby they harbor two truths.  If the theme of the intentional claims to illustrate merely a psychological attitude, by which reality is drained instead of being explained, nothing in fact separates it from the absurd spirit.  It aims to enumerate what it cannot transcend.  It affirms solely that without any unifying principle thought can still take delight in describing and understanding every aspect of experience.  The truth involved then for each of those aspects is psychological in nature.  It simply testifies to the “interest” that reality can offer.  It is a way of awaking a sleeping world and of making it vivid to the mind.  But if one attempts to extend and give a rational basis to that notion of truth, if one claims to discover in this way the “essence” of each object of knowledge, one restores its depth to experience.  For an absurd mind that is incomprehensible.  Now, it is this wavering between modesty and assurance that is noticeable in the intentional attitude, and this shimmering of phenomenological thought will illustrate the absurd reasoning better than anything else.  For Husserl speaks likewise of “extra-temporal essences” brought to light by the intention, and he sounds like Plato.  All things are not explained by one thing but by all things.  I see no difference.  To be sure, those ideas or those essences that consciousness “effectuates” at the end of every description are not yet to be considered perfect models.  But it is asserted that they are directly present in each datum of perception.  There is no longer a single idea explaining everything, but an infinite number of essences giving a meaning to an infinite number of objects.  The world comes to a stop, but also lights up.  Platonic realism becomes intuitive, but it is still realism.  Kierkegaard was swallowed up in his God; Parmenides plunged thought into the One.  But here thought hurls itself into an abstract polytheism.  But this is not all: hallucinations and fictions likewise belong to “extra-temporal essences.” In the new world of ideas, the species of centaurs collaborates with the more modest species of metropolitan man.  For the absurd man, there was a truth as well as a bitterness in that purely psychological opinion that all aspects of the world are privileged.  To say that everything is privileged is tantamount to saying that everything is equivalent.  But the metaphysical aspect of that truth is so far-reaching that through an elementary reaction he feels closer perhaps to Plato.  He is taught, in fact, that every image presupposes an equally privileged essence.  In this ideal world without hierarchy, the formal army is composed solely of generals.  To be sure, transcendency had been eliminated.  But a sudden shift in thought brings back into the world a sort of fragmentary immanence which restores to the universe its depth.  Am I to fear having carried too far a theme handled with greater circumspection by its creators? I read merely these assertions of Husserl, apparently paradoxical yet rigorously logical if what precedes is accepted: “That which is true is true absolutely, in itself; truth is one, identical with itself, however different the creatures who perceive it, men, monsters, angels or gods.” Reason triumphs and trumpets forth with that voice, I cannot deny.  What can its assertions mean in the absurd world? The perception of an angel or a god has no meaning for me.  That geometrical spot where divine reason ratifies mine will always be incomprehensible to me.  There, too, I discern a leap, and though performed in the abstract, it nonetheless means for me forgetting just what I do not want to forget.  When farther on Husserl exclaims: “If all masses subject to attraction were to disappear, the law of attraction would not be destroyed but would simply remain without any possible application,” I know that I am faced with a metaphysic of consolation.  And if I want to discover the point where thought leaves the path of evidence, I have only to reread the parallel reasoning that Husserl voices regarding the mind: “If we could contemplate clearly the exact laws of psychic processes, they would be seen to be likewise eternal and invariable, like the basic laws of theoretical natural science.  Hence they would be valid even if there were no psychic process.” Even if the mind were not, its laws would be! I see then that of a psychological truth Husserl aims to make a rational rule: after having denied the integrating power of human reason, he leaps by this expedient to eternal Reason.  Husserl’s theme of the “concrete universe” cannot then surprise me.  If I am told that all essences are not formal but that some are material, that the first are the object of logic and the second of science, this is merely a question of definition.  The abstract, I am told, indicates but a part, without consistency in itself, of a concrete universal.  But the wavering already noted allows me to throw light on the confusion of these terms.  For that may mean that the concrete object of my attention, this sky, the reflection of that water on this coat, alone preserve the prestige of the real that my interest isolates in the world.  And I shall not deny it.  But that may mean also that this coat itself is universal, has its particular and sufficient essence, belongs to the world of forms.  I then realize that merely the order of the procession has been changed.  This world has ceased to have its reflection in a higher universe, but the heaven of forms is figured in the host of images of this earth.  This changes nothing for me.  Rather than encountering here a taste for the concrete, the meaning of the human condition, I find an intellectualism sufficiently unbridled to generalize the concrete itself.  * * * It is futile to be amazed by the apparent paradox that leads thought to its own negation by the opposite paths of humiliated reason and triumphal reason.  From the abstract god of Husserl to the dazzling god of Kierkegaard the distance is not so great.  Reason and the irrational lead to the same preaching.  In truth the way matters but little; the will to arrive suffices.  The abstract philosopher and the religious philosopher start out from the same disorder and support each other in the same anxiety.  But the essential is to explain.  Nostalgia is stronger here than knowledge.  It is significant that the thought of the epoch is at once one of the most deeply imbued with a philosophy of the non-significance of the world and one of the most divided in its conclusions.  It is constantly oscillating between extreme rationalization of reality which tends to break up that thought into standard reasons and its extreme irrationalization which tends to deify it.  But this divorce is only apparent.  It is a matter of reconciliation, and, in both cases, the leap suffices.  It is always wrongly thought that the notion of reason is a one-way notion.  To tell the truth, however rigorous it may be in its ambition, this concept is nonetheless just as unstable as others.  Reason bears a quite human aspect, but it also is able to turn toward the divine.  Since Plotinus, who was the first to reconcile it with the eternal climate, it has learned to turn away from the most cherished of its principles, which is contradiction, in order to integrate into it the strangest, the quite magic one of participation.  *10 It is an instrument of thought and not thought itself.  Above all, a man’s thought is his nostalgia.  Just as reason was able to soothe the melancholy of Plotinus, it provides modern anguish the means of calming itself in the familiar setting of the eternal.  The absurd mind has less luck.  For it the world is neither so rational nor so irrational.  It is unreasonable and only that.  With Husserl the reason eventually has no limits at all.  The absurd, on the contrary, establishes its limits since it is powerless to calm its anguish.  Kierkegaard independently asserts that a single limit is enough to negate that anguish.  But the absurd does not go so far.  For it that limit is directed solely at the reason’s ambitions.  The theme of the irrational, as it is conceived by the existentials, is reason becoming confused and escaping by negating itself.  The absurd is lucid reason noting its limits.  Only at the end of this difficult path does the absurd man recognize his true motives.  Upon comparing his inner exigence and what is then offered him, he suddenly feels he is going to turn away.  In the universe of Husserl the world becomes clear and that longing for familiarity that man’s heart harbors becomes useless.  In Kierkegaard’s apocalypse that desire for clarity must be given up if it wants to be satisfied.  Sin is not so much knowing (if it were, everybody would be innocent) as wanting to know.  Indeed, it is the only sin of which the absurd man can feel that it constitutes both his guilt and his innocence.  He is offered a solution in which all the past contradictions have become merely polemical games.  But this is not the way he experienced them.  Their truth must be preserved, which consists in not being satisfied.  He does not want preaching.  My reasoning wants to be faithful to the evidence that aroused it.  That evidence is the absurd.  It is that divorce between the mind that desires and the world that disappoints, my nostalgia for unity, this fragmented universe and the contradiction that binds them together.  Kierkegaard suppresses my nostalgia and Husserl gathers together that universe.  That is not what I was expecting.  It was a matter of living and thinking with those dislocations, of knowing whether one had to accept or refuse.  There can be no question of masking the evidence, of suppressing the absurd by denying one of the terms of its equation.  It is essential to know whether one can live with it or whether, on the other hand, logic commands one to die of it.  I am not interested in philosophical suicide, but rather in plain suicide.  I merely wish to purge it of its emotional content and know its logic and its integrity.  Any other position implies for the absurd mind deceit and the mind’s retreat before what the mind itself has brought to light.  Husserl claims to obey the desire to escape “the inveterate habit of living and thinking in certain well-known and convenient conditions of existence,” but the final leap restores in him the eternal and its comfort.  The leap does not represent an extreme danger as Kierkegaard would like it to do.  The danger, on the contrary, lies in the subtle instant that precedes the leap.  Being able to remain on that dizzying crest—that is integrity and the rest is subterfuge.  I know also that never has helplessness inspired such striking harmonies as those of Kierkegaard.  But if helplessness has its place in the indifferent landscapes of history, it has none in a reasoning whose exigence is now known.  Absurd Freedom Now the main thing is done, I hold certain facts from which I cannot separate.  What I know, what is certain, what I cannot deny, what I cannot reject—this is what counts.  I can negate everything of that part of me that lives on vague nostalgias, except this desire for unity, this longing to solve, this need for clarity and cohesion.  I can refute everything in this world surrounding me that offends or enraptures me, except this chaos, this sovereign chance and this divine equivalence which springs from anarchy.  I don’t know whether this world has a meaning that transcends it.  But I know that I do not know that meaning and that it is impossible for me just now to know it.  What can a meaning outside my condition mean to me? I can understand only in human terms.  What I touch, what resists me—that is what I understand.  And these two certainties—my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the impossibility of reducing this world to a rational and reasonable principle—I also know that I cannot reconcile them.  What other truth can I admit without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack and which means nothing within the limits of my condition? If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life would have a meaning, or rather this problem would not arise, for I should belong to this world.  I should be this world to which I am now opposed by my whole consciousness and my whole insistence upon familiarity.  This ridiculous reason is what sets me in opposition to all creation.  I cannot cross it out with a stroke of the pen.  What I believe to be true I must therefore preserve.  What seems to me so obvious, even against me, I must support.  And what constitutes the basis of that conflict, of that break between the world and my mind, but the awareness of it? If therefore I want to preserve it, I can through a constant awareness, ever revived, ever alert.  This is what, for the moment, I must remember.  At this moment the absurd, so obvious and yet so hard to win, returns to a man’s life and finds its home there.  At this moment, too, the mind can leave the arid, dried-up path of lucid effort.  That path now emerges in daily life.  It encounters the world of the anonymous impersonal pronoun “one,” but henceforth man enters in with his revolt and his lucidity.  He has forgotten how to hope.  This hell of the present is his Kingdom at last.  All problems recover their sharp edge.  Abstract evidence retreats before the poetry of forms and colors.  Spiritual conflicts become embodied and return to the abject and magnificent shelter of man’s heart.  None of them is settled.  But all are transfigured.  Is one going to die, escape by the leap, rebuild a mansion of ideas and forms to one’s own scale? Is one, on the contrary, going to take up the heart-rending and marvelous wager of the absurd? Let’s make a final effort in this regard and draw all our conclusions.  The body, affection, creation, action, human nobility will then resume their places in this mad world.  At last man will again find there the wine of the absurd and the bread of indifference on which he feeds his greatness.  Let us insist again on the method: it is a matter of persisting.  At a certain point on his path the absurd man is tempted.  History is not lacking in either religions or prophets, even without gods.  He is asked to leap.  All he can reply is that he doesn’t fully understand, that it is not obvious.  Indeed, he does not want to do anything but what he fully understands.  He is assured that this is the sin of pride, but he does not understand the notion of sin; that perhaps hell is in store, but he has not enough imagination to visualize that strange future; that he is losing immortal life, but that seems to him an idle consideration.  An attempt is made to get him to admit his guilt.  He feels innocent.  To tell the truth, that is all he feels—his irreparable innocence.  This is what allows him everything.  Hence, what he demands of himself is to live solely with what he knows, to accommodate himself to what is, and to bring in nothing that is not certain.  He is told that nothing is.  But this at least is a certainty.  And it is with this that he is concerned: he wants to find out if it is possible to live without appeal .  * * * Now I can broach the notion of suicide.  It has already been felt what solution might be given.  At this point the problem is reversed.  It was previously a question of finding out whether or not life had to have a meaning to be lived.  It now becomes clear, on the contrary, that it will be lived all the better if it has no meaning.  Living an experience, a particular fate, is accepting it fully.  Now, no one will live this fate, knowing it to be absurd, unless he does everything to keep before him that absurd brought to light by consciousness.  Negating one of the terms of the opposition on which he lives amounts to escaping it.  To abolish conscious revolt is to elude the problem.  The theme of permanent revolution is thus carried into individual experience.  Living is keeping the absurd alive.  Keeping it alive is, above all, contemplating it.  Unlike Eurydice, the absurd dies only when we turn away from it.  One of the only coherent philosophical positions is thus revolt.  It is a constant confrontation between man and his own obscurity.  It is an insistence upon an impossible transparency.  It challenges the world anew every second.  Just as danger provided man the unique opportunity of seizing awareness, so metaphysical revolt extends awareness to the whole of experience.  It is that constant presence of man in his own eyes.  It is not aspiration, for it is devoid of hope.  That revolt is the certainty of a crushing fate, without the resignation that ought to accompany it.  This is where it is seen to what a degree absurd experience is remote from suicide.  It may be thought that suicide follows revolt—but wrongly.  For it does not represent the logical outcome of revolt.  It is just the contrary by the consent it presupposes.  Suicide, like the leap, is acceptance at its extreme.  Everything is over and man returns to his essential history.  His future, his unique and dreadful future—he sees and rushes toward it.  In its way, suicide settles the absurd.  It engulfs the absurd in the same death.  But I know that in order to keep alive, the absurd cannot be settled.  It escapes suicide to the extent that it is simultaneously awareness and rejection of death.  It is, at the extreme limit of the condemned man’s last thought, that shoelace that despite everything he sees a few yards away, on the very brink of his dizzying fall.  The contrary of suicide, in fact, is the man condemned to death.  That revolt gives life its value.  Spread out over the whole length of a life, it restores its majesty to that life.  To a man devoid of blinders, there is no finer sight than that of the intelligence at grips with a reality that transcends it.  The sight of human pride is unequaled.  No disparagement is of any use.  That discipline that the mind imposes on itself, that will conjured up out of nothing, that face-to-face struggle have something exceptional about them.  To impoverish that reality whose inhumanity constitutes man’s majesty is tantamount to impoverishing him himself.  I understand then why the doctrines that explain everything to me also debilitate me at the same time.  They relieve me of the weight of my own life, and yet I must carry it alone.  At this juncture, I cannot conceive that a skeptical metaphysics can be joined to an ethics of renunciation.  Consciousness and revolt, these rejections are the contrary of renunciation.  Everything that is indomitable and passionate in a human heart quickens them, on the contrary, with its own life.  It is essential to die unreconciled and not of one’s own free will.  Suicide is a repudiation.  The absurd man can only drain everything to the bitter end, and deplete himself.  The absurd is his extreme tension, which he maintains constantly by solitary effort, for he knows that in that consciousness and in that day-to-day revolt he gives proof of his only truth, which is defiance.  This is a first consequence.  * * * If I remain in that prearranged position which consists in drawing all the conclusions (and nothing else) involved in a newly discovered notion, I am faced with a second paradox.  In order to remain faithful to that method, I have nothing to do with the problem of metaphysical liberty.  Knowing whether or not man is free doesn’t interest me.  I can experience only my own freedom.  As to it, I can have no general notions, but merely a few clear insights.  The problem of “freedom as such” has no meaning.  For it is linked in quite a different way with the problem of God.  Knowing whether or not man is free involves knowing whether he can have a master.  The absurdity peculiar to this problem comes from the fact that the very notion that makes the problem of freedom possible also takes away all its meaning.  For in the presence of God there is less a problem of freedom than a problem of evil.  You know the alternative: either we are not free and God the all-powerful is responsible for evil.  Or we are free and responsible but God is not all-powerful.  All the scholastic subtleties have neither added anything to nor subtracted anything from the acuteness of this paradox.  This is why I cannot get lost in the glorification or the mere definition of a notion which eludes me and loses its meaning as soon as it goes beyond the frame of reference of my individual experience.  I cannot understand what kind of freedom would be given me by a higher being.  I have lost the sense of hierarchy.  The only conception of freedom I can have is that of the prisoner or the individual in the midst of the State.  The only one I know is freedom of thought and action.  Now if the absurd cancels all my chances of eternal freedom, it restores and magnifies, on the other hand, my freedom of action.  That privation of hope and future means an increase in man’s availability.  Before encountering the absurd, the everyday man lives with aims, a concern for the future or for justification (with regard to whom or what is not the question).  He weighs his chances, he counts on “someday,” his retirement or the labor of his sons.  He still thinks that something in his life can be directed.  In truth, he acts as if he were free, even if all the facts make a point of contradicting that liberty.  But after the absurd, everything is upset.  That idea that “I am,” my way of acting as if everything has a meaning (even if, on occasion, I said that nothing has)—all that is given the lie in vertiginous fashion by the absurdity of a possible death.  Thinking of the future, establishing aims for oneself, having preferences—all this presupposes a belief in freedom, even if one occasionally ascertains that one doesn’t feel it.  But at that moment I am well aware that that higher liberty, that freedom to be , which alone can serve as basis for a truth, does not exist.  Death is there as the only reality.  After death the chips are down.  I am not even free, either, to perpetuate myself, but a slave, and, above all, a slave without hope of an eternal revolution, without recourse to contempt.  And who without revolution and without contempt can remain a slave? What freedom can exist in the fullest sense without assurance of eternity? But at the same time the absurd man realizes that hitherto he was bound to that postulate of freedom on the illusion of which he was living.  In a certain sense, that hampered him.  To the extent to which he imagined a purpose to his life, he adapted himself to the demands of a purpose to be achieved and became the slave of his liberty.  Thus I could not act otherwise than as the father (or the engineer or the leader of a nation, or the post-office sub-clerk) that I am preparing to be.  I think I can choose to be that rather than something else.  I think so unconsciously, to be sure.  But at the same time I strengthen my postulate with the beliefs of those around me, with the presumptions of my human environment (others are so sure of being free, and that cheerful mood is so contagious!).  However far one may remain from any presumption, moral or social, one is partly influenced by them and even, for the best among them (there are good and bad presumptions), one adapts one’s life to them.  Thus the absurd man realizes that he was not really free.  To speak clearly, to the extent to which I hope, to which I worry about a truth that might be individual to me, about a way of being or creating, to the extent to which I arrange my life and prove thereby that I accept its having a meaning, I create for myself barriers between which I confine my life.  I do like so many bureaucrats of the mind and heart who only fill me with disgust and whose only vice, I now see clearly, is to take man’s freedom seriously.  The absurd enlightens me on this point: there is no future.  Henceforth this is the reason for my inner freedom.  I shall use two comparisons here.  Mystics, to begin with, find freedom in giving themselves.  By losing themselves in their god, by accepting his rules, they become secretly free.  In spontaneously accepted slavery they recover a deeper independence.  But what does that freedom mean? It may be said, above all, that they feel free with regard to themselves, and not so much free as liberated.  Likewise, completely turned toward death (taken here as the most obvious absurdity), the absurd man feels released from everything outside that passionate attention crystallizing in him.  He enjoys a freedom with regard to common rules.  It can be seen at this point that the initial themes of existential philosophy keep their entire value.  The return to consciousness, the escape from everyday sleep represent the first steps of absurd freedom.  But it is existential preaching that is alluded to, and with it that spiritual leap which basically escapes consciousness.  In the same way (this is my second comparison) the slaves of antiquity did not belong to themselves.  But they knew that freedom which consists in not feeling responsible.  *11 Death, too, has patrician hands which, while crushing, also liberate.  Losing oneself in that bottomless certainty, feeling henceforth sufficiently remote from one’s own life to increase it and take a broad view of it—this involves the principle of a liberation.  Such new independence has a definite time limit, like any freedom of action.  It does not write a check on eternity.  But it takes the place of the illusions of freedom , which all stopped with death.  The divine availability of the condemned man before whom the prison doors open in a certain early dawn, that unbelievable disinterestedness with regard to everything except for the pure flame of life—it is clear that death and the absurd are here the principles of the only reasonable freedom: that which a human heart can experience and live.  This is a second consequence.  The absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent and limited universe in which nothing is possible but everything is given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness.  He can then decide to accept such a universe and draw from it his strength, his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a life without consolation.  * * * But what does life mean in such a universe? Nothing else for the moment but indifference to the future and a desire to use up everything that is given.  Belief in the meaning of life always implies a scale of values, a choice, our preferences.  Belief in the absurd, according to our definitions, teaches the contrary.  But this is worth examining.  Knowing whether or not one can live without appeal is all that interests me.  I do not want to get out of my depth.  This aspect of life being given me, can I adapt myself to it? Now, faced with this particular concern, belief in the absurd is tantamount to substituting the quantity of experiences for the quality.  If I convince myself that this life has no other aspect than that of the absurd, if I feel that its whole equilibrium depends on that perpetual opposition between my conscious revolt and the darkness in which it struggles, if I admit that my freedom has no meaning except in relation to its limited fate, then I must say that what counts is not the best living but the most living.  It is not up to me to wonder if this is vulgar or revolting, elegant or deplorable.  Once and for all, value judgments are discarded here in favor of factual judgments.  I have merely to draw the conclusions from what I can see and to risk nothing that is hypothetical.  Supposing that living in this way were not honorable, then true propriety would command me to be dishonorable.  The most living; in the broadest sense, that rule means nothing.  It calls for definition.  It seems to begin with the fact that the notion of quantity has not been sufficiently explored.  For it can account for a large share of human experience.  A man’s rule of conduct and his scale of values have no meaning except through the quantity and variety of experiences he has been in a position to accumulate.  Now, the conditions of modern life impose on the majority of men the same quantity of experiences and consequently the same profound experience.  To be sure, there must also be taken into consideration the individual’s spontaneous contribution, the “given” element in him.  But I cannot judge of that, and let me repeat that my rule here is to get along with the immediate evidence.  I see, then, that the individual character of a common code of ethics lies not so much in the ideal importance of its basic principles as in the norm of an experience that it is possible to measure.  To stretch a point somewhat, the Greeks had the code of their leisure just as we have the code of our eight-hour day.  But already many men among the most tragic cause us to foresee that a longer experience changes this table of values.  They make us imagine that adventurer of the everyday who through mere quantity of experiences would break all records (I am purposely using this sports expression) and would thus win his own code of ethics.  *12 Yet let’s avoid romanticism and just ask ourselves what such an attitude may mean to a man with his mind made up to take up his bet and to observe strictly what he takes to be the rules of the game.  Breaking all the records is first and foremost being faced with the world as often as possible.  How can that be done without contradictions and without playing on words? For on the one hand the absurd teaches that all experiences are unimportant, and on the other it urges toward the greatest quantity of experiences.  How, then, can one fail to do as so many of those men I was speaking of earlier—choose the form of life that brings us the most possible of that human matter, thereby introducing a scale of values that on the other hand one claims to reject? But again it is the absurd and its contradictory life that teaches us.  For the mistake is thinking that that quantity of experiences depends on the circumstances of our life when it depends solely on us.  Here we have to be over-simple.  To two men living the same number of years, the world always provides the same sum of experiences.  It is up to us to be conscious of them.  Being aware of one’s life, one’s revolt, one’s freedom, and to the maximum, is living, and to the maximum.  Where lucidity dominates, the scale of values becomes useless.  Let’s be even more simple.  Let us say that the sole obstacle, the sole deficiency to be made good, is constituted by premature death.  Thus it is that no depth, no emotion, no passion, and no sacrifice could render equal in the eyes of the absurd man (even if he wished it so) a conscious life of forty years and a lucidity spread over sixty years.  *13 Madness and death are his irreparables.  Man does not choose.  The absurd and the extra life it involves therefore do not depend on man’s will , but on its contrary, which is death.  *14 Weighing words carefully, it is altogether a question of luck.  One just has to be able to consent to this.  There will never be any substitute for twenty years of life and experience.  By what is an odd inconsistency in such an alert race, the Greeks claimed that those who died young were beloved of the gods.  And that is true only if you are willing to believe that entering the ridiculous world of the gods is forever losing the purest of joys, which is feeling, and feeling on this earth.  The present and the succession of presents before a constantly conscious soul is the ideal of the absurd man.  But the word “ideal” rings false in this connection.  It is not even his vocation, but merely the third consequence of his reasoning.  Having started from an anguished awareness of the inhuman, the meditation on the absurd returns at the end of its itinerary to the very heart of the passionate flames of human revolt.  *15 * * * Thus I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my revolt, my freedom, and my passion.  By the mere activity of consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation to death—and I refuse suicide.  I know, to be sure, the dull resonance that vibrates throughout these days.  Yet I have but a word to say: that it is necessary.  When Nietzsche writes: “It clearly seems that the chief thing in heaven and on earth is to obey at length and in a single direction: in the long run there results something for which it is worth the trouble of living on this earth as, for example, virtue, art, music, the dance, reason, the mind—something that transfigures, something delicate, mad, or divine,” he elucidates the rule of a really distinguished code of ethics.  But he also points the way of the absurd man.  Obeying the flame is both the easiest and the hardest thing to do.  However, it is good for man to judge himself occasionally.  He is alone in being able to do so.  “Prayer,” says Alain, “is when night descends over thought.” “But the mind must meet the night,” reply the mystics and the existentials.  Yes, indeed, but not that night that is born under closed eyelids and through the mere will of man—dark, impenetrable night that the mind calls up in order to plunge into it.  If it must encounter a night, let it be rather that of despair, which remains lucid—polar night, vigil of the mind, whence will arise perhaps that white and virginal brightness which outlines every object in the light of the intelligence.  At that degree, equivalence encounters passionate understanding.  Then it is no longer even a question of judging the existential leap.  It resumes its place amid the age-old fresco of human attitudes.  For the spectator, if he is conscious, that leap is still absurd.  In so far as it thinks it solves the paradox, it reinstates it intact.  On this score, it is stirring.  On this score, everything resumes its place and the absurd world is reborn in all its splendor and diversity.  But it is bad to stop, hard to be satisfied with a single way of seeing, to go without contradiction, perhaps the most subtle of all spiritual forces.  The preceding merely defines a way of thinking.  But the point is to live.  *1 From the point of view of the relative value of truth.  On the other hand, from the point of view of virile behavior, this scholar’s fragility may well make us smile.  *2 Let us not miss this opportunity to point out the relative character of this essay.  Suicide may indeed be related to much more honorable considerations—for example, the political suicides of protest, as they were called, during the Chinese revolution.  *3 I have heard of an emulator of Peregrinos, a post-war writer who, after having finished his first book, committed suicide to attract attention to his work.  Attention was in fact attracted, but the book was judged no good.  *4 But not in the proper sense.  This is not a definition, but rather an enumeration of the feelings that may admit of the absurd.  Still, the enumeration finished, the absurd has nevertheless not been exhausted.  *5 Apropos of the notion of exception particularly and against Aristotle.  *6 It may be thought that I am neglecting here the essential problem, that of faith.  But I am not examining the philosophy of Kierkegaard or of Chestov or, later on, of Husserl (this would call for a different place and a different attitude of mind); I am simply borrowing a theme from them and examining whether its consequences can fit the already established rules.  It is merely a matter of persistence.  *7 I did not say “excludes God,” which would still amount to asserting.  *8 Let me assert again: it is not the affirmation of God that is questioned here, but rather the logic leading to that affirmation.  *9 Even the most rigorous epistemologies imply metaphysics.  And to such a degree that the metaphysic of many contemporary thinkers consists in having nothing but an epistemology.  *10 A.—At that time reason had to adapt itself or die.  It adapts itself.  With Plotinus, after being logical it becomes æsthetic.  Metaphor takes the place of the syllogism.  B.—Moreover, this is not Plotinus’ only contribution to phenomenology.  This whole attitude is already contained in the concept so dear to the Alexandrian thinker that there is not only an idea of man but also an idea of Socrates.  *11 I am concerned here with a factual comparison, not with an apology of humility.  The absurd man is the contrary of the reconciled man.  *12 Quantity sometimes constitutes quality.  If I can believe the latest restatements of scientific theory, all matter is constituted by centers of energy.  Their greater or lesser quantity makes its specificity more or less remarkable.  A billion ions and one ion differ not only in quantity but also in quality.  It is easy to find an analogy in human experience.  *13 Same reflection on a notion as different as the idea of eternal nothingness.  It neither adds anything to nor subtracts anything from reality.  In psychological experience of nothingness, it is by the consideration of what will happen in two thousand years that our own nothingness truly takes on meaning.  In one of its aspects, eternal nothingness is made up precisely of the sum of lives to come which will not be ours.  *14 The will is only the agent here: it tends to maintain consciousness.  It provides a discipline of life, and that is appreciable.  *15 What matters is coherence.  We start out here from acceptance of the world.  But Oriental thought teaches that one can indulge in the same effort of logic by choosing against the world.  That is just as legitimate and gives this essay its perspectives and its limits.  But when the negation of the world is pursued just as rigorously, one often achieves (in certain Vedantic schools) similar results regarding, for instance, the indifference of works.  In a book of great importance, Le Choix , Jean Grenier establishes in this way a veritable “philosophy of indifference.” Continued, The Myth of Sisyphus O my soul, do not aspire to immortal life, but exhaust the limits of the possible .  —Pindar, Pythian iii THE PAGES that follow deal with an absurd sensitivity that can be found widespread in the age—and not with an absurd philosophy which our time, properly speaking, has not known.  It is therefore simply fair to point out, at the outset, what these pages owe to certain contemporary thinkers.  It is so far from my intention to hide this that they will be found cited and commented upon throughout this work.  But it is useful to note at the same time that the absurd, hitherto taken as a conclusion, is considered in this essay as a starting-point.  In this sense it may be said that there is something provisional in my commentary: one cannot prejudge the position it entails.  There will be found here merely the description, in the pure state, of an intellectual malady.  No metaphysic, no belief is involved in it for the moment.  These are the limits and the only bias of this book.  Certain personal experiences urge me to make this clear.  Fear and Trembling Problemata Fear and Trembling Preface Not just in commerce but in the world of ideas too our age is putting on a veritable clearance sale.  Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid.  Every speculative score-keeper who conscientiously marks up the momentous march of modem philosophy, every lecturer, crammer, student, everyone on the outskirts of philosophy or at its centre is unwilling to stop with doubting everything.  They all go further.  It would perhaps be malapropos to inquire where they think they are going, though surely we may in all politeness and respect take it for granted that they have indeed doubted everything, otherwise it would be odd to talk of going further.  This preliminary step is one they have all of them taken, and presumably with so little effort as to feel no need to drop some word about how; for not even someone genuinely anxious for a little enlightenment on this will find such.  Not a gesture that might point him in the right direction, no small dietary prescription for how to go about such a huge task.  ‘But Descartes did it, didn’t he?’ A venerable, humble, honest thinker whose writings surely no one can read without being most deeply stirred - Descartes must have done what he has said and said what he has done.  A rare enough occurrence in our own time! Descartes, as he himself repeatedly insists, was no doubter in matters of faith.  (‘But we must keep in mind what has been said, that we must trust to this natural light only so long as nothing contrary to it is revealed by God himself ...  Above all we should impress on our memory as an infallible rule that what God has revealed to us is incomparably more certain than anything else; and that we ought to submit to the Divine authority rather than to our own judgement even though the light of reason may seem to us to suggest, with the utmost clearness and evidence, something opposite’ from Principles 28 and 76 of Principles of Philosophy.) Descartes has not cried ‘Fire!’ and made it everyone’s duty to doubt, for Descartes was a quiet and lonely thinker, not a bellowing streetwatch; he was modest enough to allow that his method was important only for himself and sprang partly from his own earlier bungling with knowledge.  (‘Thus my design here is not to teach the Method which everyone should follow in order to promote the good conduct of Reason, but only to show in what manner I have endeavoured to conduct my own ...  But so soon as I had achieved the entire course of study that is, of his youth - Johannes de silentio’s interpolation at the close of which one is usually received into the ranks of the learned, I entirely changed my opinion.  For I found myself embarrassed with so many doubts and errors that it seemed to me that the effort to instruct myself had no effect other than the increasing discovery of my own ignorance’ Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting the Reason and Seeking the Truth in the Sciences .) - What those old Greeks, whom one must also credit with a little knowledge of philosophy, took to be the task of a whole lifetime, doubt not being a skill one acquires in days and weeks; what the old veteran warrior achieved after keeping the balance of doubt in the face of all inveiglements, fearlessly rejecting the certainties of sense and thought, incorruptibly defying selfish anxieties and the wheedling of sympathies - that is where nowadays everyone begins.  Today nobody will stop with faith; they all go further.  It would perhaps be rash to inquire where to, but surely a mark of urbanity and good breeding on my part to assume that in fact everyone does indeed have faith, otherwise it would be odd to talk of going further.  In those old days it was different.  For then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, not a skill thought to be acquired in either days or weeks.  When the old campaigner approached the end, had fought the good fight, and kept his faith, his heart was still young enough not to have forgotten the fear and trembling that disciplined his youth and which, although the grown man mastered it, no man altogether outgrows - unless he somehow manages at the earliest possible opportunity to go further.  Where these venerable figures arrived our own age begins, in order to go further.  The present author is no philosopher, he has not understood the System, nor does he know if there really is one, or if it has been completed.  As far as his own weak head is concerned the thought of what huge heads everyone must have in order to have such huge thoughts is already enough.  Even if one were able to render the whole of the content of faith into conceptual form, it would not follow that one had grasped faith, grasped how one came to it, or how it came to one.  The present author is no philosopher, he is poetice et eleganter to put it in poetic and well-chosen terms, an occasional copyist who neither writes the System nor makes any promises about it, who pledges neither anything about the System nor himself to it.  He writes because for him doing so is a luxury, the more agreeable and conspicuous the fewer who buy and read what he writes.  In an age where passion has been done away with for the sake of science he easily foresees his fate - in an age when an author who wants readers must be careful to write in a way that he can be comfortably leafed through during the after-dinner nap, and be sure to present himself to the world like the polite gardener’s boy in the Advertiser who, hat in hand and with good references from his previous place of employment, recommends himself to a much-esteemed public.  He foresees his fate will be to be completely ignored; has a dreadful foreboding that the scourge of zealous criticism will more than once make itself felt; and shudders at what terrifies him even more, that some enterprising recorder, a paragraph swallower who to rescue learning is always willing to do to others’ writings what, to ‘preserve good taste’, Trop nobly did to The Destruction of the Human Race, will slice him into sections as ruthlessly as the man who, in the service of the science of punctuation, divided up his speech by counting the words and putting a full-stop after every fifty and a semi-colon after every thirty-five.  No, I prostrate myself before any systematic bag-searcher; this is not the System, it hasn’t the slightest thing to do with the System.  I wish all good on the System and on the Danish shareholders in that omnibus; for it will hardly become a tower.  I wish them good luck and prosperity one and all.  Respectfully Johannes de silentio Fear and Trembling Attunement There was once a man; he had learned as a child that beautiful tale of how God tried Abraham, how he withstood the test, kept his faith and for the second time received a son against every expectation.  When he became older he read the same story with even greater admiration, for life had divided what had been united in the child’s pious simplicity.  The older he became the more often his thoughts turned to that tale, his enthusiasm became stronger and stronger, and yet less and less could he understand it.  Finally it put everything else out of his mind; his soul had but one wish, actually to see Abraham, and one longing, to have been witness to those events.  It was not the beautiful regions of the East, nor the earthly splendour of the Promised Land, he longed to see, not the God-fearing couple whose old age God had blessed, not the venerable figure of the patriarch stricken in years, not the youthful vigour God gave to Isaac - it would have been the same if it had taken place on a barren heath.  What he yearned for was to accompany them on the three-day journey, when Abraham rode with grief before him and Isaac by his side.  He wanted to be there at that moment when Abraham raised his eyes and saw in the distance the mountain in Moriah, the moment he left the asses behind and went on up the mountain alone with Isaac.  For what occupied him was not the finely wrought fabric of imagination, but the shudder of thought.  This man was no thinker, he felt no need to go further than faith.  To be remembered as its father seemed to him to be surely the greatest glory of all, and to have it a lot to be envied even if no one else knew.  This man was no learned exegete, he knew no Hebrew; had he known Hebrew then perhaps it might have been easy for him to understand the story of Abraham.  I And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him ...  Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.  It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, had the asses saddled and left his tent, taking Isaac with him, but Sarah watched them from the window as they went down the valley until she could see them no more.  They rode in silence for three days; on the morning of the fourth Abraham still said not a word, but raised his eyes and saw afar the mountain in Moriah.  He left the servants behind and went on alone up the mountain with Isaac beside him.  But Abraham said to himself: ‘I won’t conceal from Isaac where this way is leading him.’ He stood still, laid his hand on Isaac’s head to give him his blessing, and Isaac bent down to receive it.  And Abraham’s expression was fatherly, his gaze gentle, his speech encouraging.  But Isaac could not understand him, his soul could not be uplifted; he clung to Abraham’s knees, pleaded at his feet, begged for his young life, for his fair promise; he called to mind the joy in Abraham’s house, reminded him of the sorrow and loneliness.  Then Abraham lifted the boy up and walked with him, taking him by the hand, and his words were full of comfort and exhortation.  But Isaac could not understand him.  Abraham climbed the mountain in Moriah, but Isaac did not understand him.  Then he turned away from Isaac for a moment, but when Isaac saw his face a second time it was changed, his gaze was wild, his mien one of horror.  He caught Isaac by the chest, threw him to the ground and said: ‘Foolish boy, do you believe I am your father? I am an idolater.  Do you believe this is God’s command? No, it is my own desire.’ Then Isaac trembled and in his anguish cried: ‘God in heaven have mercy on me, God of Abraham have mercy on me; if I have no father on earth, then be Thou my father!’ But below his breath Abraham said to himself: ‘Lord in heaven I thank Thee; it is after all better that he believe I am a monster than that he lose faith in Thee.’ When the child is to be weaned the mother blackens her breast, for it would be a shame were the breast to look pleasing when the child is not to have it.  So the child believes that the breast has changed but the mother is the same, her look loving and tender as ever.  Lucky the one that needed no more terrible means to wean the child! II It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, embraced Sarah, the bride of his old age, and Sarah kissed Isaac, who had taken her disgrace from her, was her pride and hope for all generations.  So they rode on in silence and Abraham’s eyes were fixed on the ground, until the fourth day when he looked up and saw afar the mountain in Moriah, but he turned his gaze once again to the ground.  Silently he arranged the fire-wood, bound Isaac; silently he drew the knife.  Then he saw the ram that God had appointed.  He sacrificed that and returned home ...  From that day on, Abraham became old, he could not forget that God had demanded this of him.  Isaac throve as before; but Abraham’s eye was darkened, he saw joy no more.  When the child has grown and is to be weaned the mother virginally covers her breast, so the child no more has a mother.  Lucky the child that lost its mother in no other way! III It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, kissed Sarah the young mother, and Sarah kissed Isaac, her delight, her joy for ever.  And Abraham rode thoughtfully on.  He thought of Hagar and of the son whom he had driven out into the desert.  He climbed the mountain in Moriah, he drew the knife.  It was a tranquil evening when Abraham rode out alone, and he rode to the mountain in Moriah: he threw himself on his face, he begged God to forgive his sin at having been willing to sacrifice Isaac, at the father’s having forgotten his duty to his son.  He rode more frequently on his lonely way, but found no peace.  He could not comprehend that it was a sin to have been willing to sacrifice to God the best he owned; that for which he would many a time have gladly laid down his own life; and if it was a sin, if he had not so loved Isaac, then he could not understand that it could be forgiven; for what sin was more terrible? When the child is to be weaned the mother too is not without sorrow, that she and the child grow more and more apart; that the child which first lay beneath her heart, yet later rested at her breast, should no longer be so close.  Thus together they suffer this brief sorrow.  Lucky the one who kept the child so close and had no need to sorrow more! IV It was early morning.  Everything had been made ready for the journey in Abraham’s house.  Abraham took leave of Sarah, and the faithful servant Eleazar followed him out on the way until he had to turn back.  They rode together in accord, Abraham and Isaac, until they came to the mountain in Moriah.  Yet Abraham made everything ready for the sacrifice, calmly and quietly, but as he turned away Isaac saw that Abraham’s left hand was clenched in anguish, that a shudder went through his body - but Abraham drew the knife.  Then they turned home again and Sarah ran to meet them, but Isaac had lost his faith.  Never a word in the whole world is spoken of this, and Isaac told no one what he had seen, and Abraham never suspected that anyone had seen it.  When the child is to be weaned the mother has more solid food at hand, so that the child will not perish.  Lucky the one who has more solid food at hand! In these and similar ways this man of whom we speak thought about those events.  Every time he came home from a journey to the mountain in Moriah he collapsed in weariness, clasped his hands, and said: ‘Yet no one was as great as Abraham; who is able to understand him?’ Fear and Trembling Fear and Trembling What Tarquin the Proud said in his garden with the poppy blooms was understood by the son but not by the messenger.  HAMANN Fear and Trembling Epilogue Once when the spice market in Holland was a little slack, the merchants had some cargoes dumped at sea to force up the price.  That was a pardonable, perhaps necessary, stratagem.  Is it something similar we need in the world of spirit? Are we so convinced of having reached the heights that there is nothing left but piously to believe we still haven’t come that far, so as at least to have something to fill the time with? Is it this kind of trick of self-deception the present generation needs, is it to a virtuosity in this it should be educated, or has it not already perfected itself sufficiently in the art of self-deception? Or is what it needs not rather an honest seriousness which fearlessly and incorruptibly calls attention to the tasks, an honest seriousness that lovingly fences the tasks about, which does not frighten people into wanting to dash precipitately to the heights, but keeps the tasks young and beautiful and charming to behold, and inviting to all, yet hard too and an inspiration to noble minds, since noble natures are only inspired by difficulty? However much one generation learns from another, it can never learn from its predecessor the genuinely human factor.  In this respect every generation begins afresh, has no task other than that of any previous generation, and comes no further, provided the latter hasn’t shirked its task and deceived itself.  This authentically human factor is passion, in which the one generation also fully understands the other and understands itself.  Thus no generation has learned from another how to love, no generation can begin other than at the beginning, the task of no later generation is shorter than its predecessor’s, and if someone, unlike the previous generation, is unwilling to stay with love but wants to go further, then that is simply idle and foolish talk.  But the highest passion in a human being is faith, and here no generation begins other than where its predecessor did, every generation begins from the beginning, the succeeding generation comes no further than the previous one, provided the latter was true to its task and didn’t betray it.  That this sounds wearying is not of course for the generation to say, for it is indeed the generation that has the task and it has nothing to do with the fact that the previous generation had the same task, unless that particular generation or the individuals in it presumed to occupy the position to which only the spirit that governs the world, and which has the endurance not to grow weary, is entitled.  If that is the kind of thing the generation begins to do, it is perverted, and what wonder then if the whole of existence should look perverted to it? For surely no one has found life more perverted than the tailor in the fairy-tale who got to heaven in his lifetime and from there looked down on the world.  So long as the generation only worries about its task, which is the highest it can attain to, it cannot grow weary.  That task is always enough for a human lifetime.  When children on holiday get through all their games by noon and then ask impatiently, ‘Can’t anyone think of a new game?’, does this show that they are more developed and advanced than children of the same or a previous generation who could make the games they already know last the whole day? Or does it not rather show that those children lack what I would call the good-natured seriousness that belongs to play? Faith is the highest passion in a human being.  Many in every generation may not come that far, but none comes further.  Whether there are also many who do not discover it in our own age I leave open.  I can only refer to my own experience, that of one who makes no secret of the fact that he has far to go, yet without therefore wishing to deceive either himself or what is great by reducing this latter to a triviality, to a children’s disease which one must hope to get over as soon as possible.  But life has tasks enough, even for one who fails to come as far as faith, and when he loves these honestly life won’t be a waste either, even if it can never compare with that of those who had a sense of the highest and grasped it.  But anyone who comes to faith (whether he be greatly talented or simple-minded makes no difference) won’t remain at a standstill there.  Indeed he would be shocked if anyone said this to him.  Just as the lover would be indignant if someone said he had come to a standstill in his love, for he would reply, ‘I’m by no means standing still in my love, for I have my life in it.’ And yet he too doesn’t come any further, not to anything else.  For when he finds that out he has another explanation.  ‘One must go further, one must go further.’ This need to go on is of ancient standing.  Heraclitus the ‘obscure’ who reposited his thoughts in his writings and his writings in the Temple of Diana (for his thoughts had been his armour in life, which he therefore hung up in the temple of the goddess), the obscure Heraclitus has said, ‘One can never walk through the same river twice.‘ 16 The obscure Heraclitus had a disciple who didn’t remain standing there but went further and added, ‘One cannot do it even once.’† Poor Heraclitus to have such a disciple! This improvement changed the Heraclitian principle into an Eleatic doctrine denying movement, and yet all that disciple wanted was to be a disciple of Heraclitus who went further, not back to what Heraclitus had abandoned.  Absurd Creation, The Myth of Sisyphus ABSURD CREATION Philosophy and Fiction A LL THOSE lives maintained in the rarefied air of the absurd could not persevere without some profound and constant thought to infuse its strength into them.  Right here, it can be only a strange feeling of fidelity.  Conscious men have been seen to fulfill their task amid the most stupid of wars without considering themselves in contradiction.  This is because it was essential to elude nothing.  There is thus a metaphysical honor in enduring the world’s absurdity.  Conquest or play-acting, multiple loves, absurd revolt are tributes that man pays to his dignity in a campaign in which he is defeated in advance.  It is merely a matter of being faithful to the rule of the battle.  That thought may suffice to sustain a mind; it has supported and still supports whole civilizations.  War cannot be negated.  One must live it or die of it.  So it is with the absurd: it is a question of breathing with it, of recognizing its lessons and recovering their flesh.  In this regard the absurd joy par excellence is creation.  “Art and nothing but art,” said Nietzsche; “we have art in order not to die of the truth.” In the experience that I am attempting to describe and to stress on several modes, it is certain that a new torment arises wherever another dies.  The childish chasing after forgetfulness, the appeal of satisfaction are now devoid of echo.  But the constant tension that keeps man face to face with the world, the ordered delirium that urges him to be receptive to everything leave him another fever.  In this universe the work of art is then the sole chance of keeping his consciousness and of fixing its adventures.  Creating is living doubly.  The groping, anxious quest of a Proust, his meticulous collecting of flowers, of wallpapers, and of anxieties, signifies nothing else.  At the same time, it has no more significance than the continual and imperceptible creation in which the actor, the conqueror, and all absurd men indulge every day of their lives.  All try their hands at miming, at repeating, and at re-creating the reality that is theirs.  We always end up by having the appearance of our truths.  All existence for a man turned away from the eternal is but a vast mime under the mask of the absurd.  Creation is the great mime.  Such men know to begin with, and then their whole effort is to examine, to enlarge, and to enrich the ephemeral island on which they have just landed.  But first they must know.  For the absurd discovery coincides with a pause in which future passions are prepared and justified.  Even men without a gospel have their Mount of Olives.  And one must not fall asleep on theirs either.  For the absurd man it is not a matter of explaining and solving, but of experiencing and describing.  Everything begins with lucid indifference.  Describing—that is the last ambition of an absurd thought.  Science likewise, having reached the end of its paradoxes, ceases to propound and stops to contemplate and sketch the ever virgin landscape of phenomena.  The heart learns thus that the emotion delighting us when we see the world’s aspects comes to us not from its depth but from their diversity.  Explanation is useless, but the sensation remains and, with it, the constant attractions of a universe inexhaustible in quantity.  The place of the work of art can be understood at this point.  It marks both the death of an experience and its multiplication.  It is a sort of monotonous and passionate repetition of the themes already orchestrated by the world: the body, inexhaustible image on the pediment of temples, forms or colors, number or grief.  It is therefore not indifferent, as a conclusion, to encounter once again the principal themes of this essay in the wonderful and childish world of the creator.  It would be wrong to see a symbol in it and to think that the work of art can be considered at last as a refuge for the absurd.  It is itself an absurd phenomenon, and we are concerned merely with its description.  It does not offer an escape for the intellectual ailment.  Rather, it is one of the symptoms of that ailment which reflects it throughout a man’s whole thought.  But for the first time it makes the mind get outside of itself and places it in opposition to others, not for it to get lost but to show it clearly the blind path that all have entered upon.  In the time of the absurd reasoning, creation follows indifference and discovery.  It marks the point from which absurd passions spring and where the reasoning stops.  Its place in this essay is justified in this way.  It will suffice to bring to light a few themes common to the creator and the thinker in order to find in the work of art all the contradictions of thought involved in the absurd.  Indeed, it is not so much identical conclusions that prove minds to be related as the contradictions that are common to them.  So it is with thought and creation.  I hardly need to say that the same anguish urges man to these two attitudes.  This is where they coincide in the beginning.  But among all the thoughts that start from the absurd, I have seen that very few remain within it.  And through their deviations or infidelities I have best been able to measure what belonged to the absurd.  Similarly I must wonder: is an absurd work of art possible? * * * It would be impossible to insist too much on the arbitrary nature of the former opposition between art and philosophy.  If you insist on taking it in too limited a sense, it is certainly false.  If you mean merely that these two disciplines each have their peculiar climate, that is probably true but remains vague.  The only acceptable argument used to lie in the contradiction brought up between the philosopher enclosed within his system and the artist placed before his work.  But this was pertinent for a certain form of art and of philosophy which we consider secondary here.  The idea of an art detached from its creator is not only outmoded; it is false.  In opposition to the artist, it is pointed out that no philosopher ever created several systems.  But that is true in so far, indeed, as no artist ever expressed more than one thing under different aspects.  The instantaneous perfection of art, the necessity for its renewal—this is true only through a preconceived notion.  For the work of art likewise is a construction and everyone knows how monotonous the great creators can be.  For the same reason as the thinker, the artist commits himself and becomes himself in his work.  That osmosis raises the most important of æsthetic problems.  Moreover, to anyone who is convinced of the mind’s singleness of purpose, nothing is more futile than these distinctions based on methods and objects.  There are no frontiers between the disciplines that man sets himself for understanding and loving.  They interlock, and the same anxiety merges them.  It is necessary to state this to begin with.  For an absurd work of art to be possible, thought in its most lucid form must be involved in it.  But at the same time thought must not be apparent except as the regulating intelligence.  This paradox can be explained according to the absurd.  The work of art is born of the intelligence’s refusal to reason the concrete.  It marks the triumph of the carnal.  It is lucid thought that provokes it, but in that very act that thought repudiates itself.  It will not yield to the temptation of adding to what is described a deeper meaning that it knows to be illegitimate.  The work of art embodies a drama of the intelligence, but it proves this only indirectly.  The absurd work requires an artist conscious of these limitations and an art in which the concrete signifies nothing more than itself.  It cannot be the end, the meaning, and the consolation of a life.  Creating or not creating changes nothing.  The absurd creator does not prize his work.  He could repudiate it.  He does sometimes repudiate it.  An Abyssinia suffices for this, as in the case of Rimbaud.  At the same time a rule of æsthetics can be seen in this.  The true work of art is always on the human scale.  It is essentially the one that says “less.” There is a certain relationship between the global experience of the artist and the work that reflects that experience, between Wilhelm Meister and Goethe’s maturity.  That relationship is bad when the work aims to give the whole experience in the lace-paper of an explanatory literature.  That relationship is good when the work is but a piece cut out of experience, a facet of the diamond in which the inner luster is epitomized without being limited.  In the first case there is overloading and pretension to the eternal.  In the second, a fecund work because of a whole implied experience, the wealth of which is suspected.  The problem for the absurd artist is to acquire this savoir-vivre which transcends savoir-faire .  And in the end, the great artist under this climate is, above all, a great living being, it being understood that living in this case is just as much experiencing as reflecting.  The work then embodies an intellectual drama.  The absurd work illustrates thought’s renouncing of its prestige and its resignation to being no more than the intelligence that works up appearances and covers with images what has no reason.  If the world were clear, art would not exist.  I am not speaking here of the arts of form or color in which description alone prevails in its splendid modesty.  *1 Expression begins where thought ends.  Those adolescents with empty eyesockets who people temples and museums—their philosophy has been expressed in gestures.  For an absurd man it is more educative than all libraries.  Under another aspect the same is true for music.  If any art is devoid of lessons, it is certainly music.  It is too closely related to mathematics not to have borrowed their gratuitousness.  That game the mind plays with itself according to set and measured laws takes place in the sonorous compass that belongs to us and beyond which the vibrations nevertheless meet in an inhuman universe.  There is no purer sensation.  These examples are too easy.  The absurd man recognizes as his own these harmonies and these forms.  But I should like to speak here of a work in which the temptation to explain remains greatest, in which illusion offers itself automatically, in which conclusion is almost inevitable.  I mean fictional creation.  I propose to inquire whether or not the absurd can hold its own there.  * * * To think is first of all to create a world (or to limit one’s own world, which comes to the same thing).  It is starting out from the basic disagreement that separates man from his experience in order to find a common ground according to one’s nostalgia, a universe hedged with reasons or lighted up with analogies but which, in any case, gives an opportunity to rescind the unbearable divorce.  The philosopher, even if he is Kant, is a creator.  He has his characters, his symbols, and his secret action.  He has his plot endings.  On the contrary, the lead taken by the novel over poetry and the essay merely represents, despite appearances, a greater intellectualization of the art.  Let there be no mistake about it; I am speaking of the greatest.  The fecundity and the importance of a literary form are often measured by the trash it contains.  The number of bad novels must not make us forget the value of the best.  These, indeed, carry with them their universe.  The novel has its logic, its reasonings, its intuition, and its postulates.  It also has its requirements of clarity.  *2 The classical opposition of which I was speaking above is even less justified in this particular case.  It held in the time when it was easy to separate philosophy from its authors.  Today when thought has ceased to lay claim to the universal, when its best history would be that of its repentances, we know that the system, when it is worth while, cannot be separated from its author.  The Ethics itself, in one of its aspects, is but a long and reasoned personal confession.  Abstract thought at last returns to its prop of flesh.  And, likewise, the fictional activities of the body and of the passions are regulated a little more according to the requirements of a vision of the world.  The writer has given up telling “stories” and creates his universe.  The great novelists are philosophical novelists—that is, the contrary of thesis-writers.  For instance, Balzac, Sade, Melville, Stendhal, Dostoevsky, Proust, Malraux, Kafka, to cite but a few.  But in fact the preference they have shown for writing in images rather than in reasoned arguments is revelatory of a certain thought that is common to them all, convinced of the uselessness of any principle of explanation and sure of the educative message of perceptible appearance.  They consider the work of art both as an end and a beginning.  It is the outcome of an often unexpressed philosophy, its illustration and its consummation.  But it is complete only through the implications of that philosophy.  It justifies at last that variant of an old theme that a little thought estranges from life whereas much thought reconciles to life.  Incapable of refining the real, thought pauses to mimic it.  The novel in question is the instrument of that simultaneously relative and inexhaustible knowledge, so like that of love.  Of love, fictional creation has the initial wonder and the fecund rumination.  * * * These at least are the charms I see in it at the outset.  But I saw them likewise in those princes of humiliated thought whose suicides I was later able to witness.  What interests me, indeed, is knowing and describing the force that leads them back toward the common path of illusion.  The same method will consequently help me here.  The fact of having already utilized it will allow me to shorten my argument and to sum it up without delay in a particular example.  I want to know whether, accepting a life without appeal , one can also agree to work and create without appeal and what is the way leading to these liberties.  I want to liberate my universe of its phantoms and to people it solely with flesh-and-blood truths whose presence I cannot deny.  I can perform absurd work, choose the creative attitude rather than another.  But an absurd attitude, if it is to remain so, must remain aware of its gratuitousness.  So it is with the work of art.  If the commandments of the absurd are not respected, if the work does not illustrate divorce and revolt, if it sacrifices to illusions and arouses hope, it ceases to be gratuitous.  I can no longer detach myself from it.  My life may find a meaning in it, but that is trifling.  It ceases to be that exercise in detachment and passion which crowns the splendor and futility of a man’s life.  In the creation in which the temptation to explain is the strongest, can one overcome that temptation? In the fictional world in which awareness of the real world is keenest, can I remain faithful to the absurd without sacrificing to the desire to judge? So many questions to be taken into consideration in a last effort.  It must be already clear what they signify.  They are the last scruples of an awareness that fears to forsake its initial and difficult lesson in favor of a final illusion.  What holds for creation, looked upon as one of the possible attitudes for the man conscious of the absurd, holds for all the styles of life open to him.  The conqueror or the actor, the creator or Don Juan may forget that their exercise in living could not do without awareness of its mad character.  One becomes accustomed so quickly.  A man wants to earn money in order to be happy, and his whole effort and the best of a life are devoted to the earning of that money.  Happiness is forgotten; the means are taken for the end.  Likewise, the whole effort of this conqueror will be diverted to ambition, which was but a way toward a greater life.  Don Juan in turn will likewise yield to his fate, be satisfied with that existence whose nobility is of value only through revolt.  For one it is awareness and for the other, revolt; in both cases the absurd has disappeared.  There is so much stubborn hope in the human heart.  The most destitute men often end up by accepting illusion.  That approval prompted by the need for peace inwardly parallels the existential consent.  There are thus gods of light and idols of mud.  But it is essential to find the middle path leading to the faces of man.  So far, the failures of the absurd exigence have best informed us as to what it is.  In the same way, if we are to be informed, it will suffice to notice that fictional creation can present the same ambiguity as certain philosophies.  Hence I can choose as illustration a work comprising everything that denotes awareness of the absurd, having a clear starting-point and a lucid climate.  Its consequences will enlighten us.  If the absurd is not respected in it, we shall know by what expedient illusion enters in.  A particular example, a theme, a creator’s fidelity will suffice, then.  This involves the same analysis that has already been made at greater length.  I shall examine a favorite theme of Dostoevsky.  I might just as well have studied other works.  *3 But in this work the problem is treated directly, in the sense of nobility and emotion, as for the existential philosophies already discussed.  This parallelism serves my purpose.  Kirilov All of Dostoevsky’s heroes question themselves as to the meaning of life.  In this they are modern: they do not fear ridicule.  What distinguishes modern sensibility from classical sensibility is that the latter thrives on moral problems and the former on metaphysical problems.  In Dostoevsky’s novels the question is propounded with such intensity that it can only invite extreme solutions.  Existence is illusory or it is eternal.  If Dostoevsky were satisfied with this inquiry, he would be a philosopher.  But he illustrates the consequences that such intellectual pastimes may have in a man’s life, and in this regard he is an artist.  Among those consequences, his attention is arrested particularly by the last one, which he himself calls logical suicide in his Diary of a Writer .  In the installments for December 1876, indeed, he imagines the reasoning of “logical suicide.” Convinced that human existence is an utter absurdity for anyone without faith in immortality, the desperate man comes to the following conclusions: “Since in reply to my questions about happiness, I am told, through the intermediary of my consciousness, that I cannot be happy except in harmony with the great all, which I cannot conceive and shall never be in a position to conceive, it is evident…” “Since, finally, in this connection, I assume both the role of the plaintiff and that of the defendant, of the accused and of the judge, and since I consider this comedy perpetrated by nature altogether stupid, and since I even deem it humiliating for me to deign to play it…” “In my indisputable capacity of plaintiff and defendant, of judge and accused, I condemn that nature which, with such impudent nerve, brought me into being in order to suffer— I condemn it to be annihilated with me.” There remains a little humor in that position.  This suicide kills himself because, on the metaphysical plane, he is vexed .  In a certain sense he is taking his revenge.  This is his way of proving that he “will not be had.” It is known, however, that the same theme is embodied, but with the most wonderful generality, in Kirilov of The Possessed , likewise an advocate of logical suicide.  Kirilov the engineer declares somewhere that he wants to take his own life because it “is his idea.” Obviously the word must be taken in its proper sense.  It is for an idea, a thought, that he is getting ready for death.  This is the superior suicide.  Progressively, in a series of scenes in which Kirilov’s mask is gradually illuminated, the fatal thought driving him is revealed to us.  The engineer, in fact, goes back to the arguments of the Diary .  He feels that God is necessary and that he must exist.  But he knows that he does not and cannot exist.  “Why do you not realize,” he exclaims, “that this is sufficient reason for killing oneself?” That attitude involves likewise for him some of the absurd consequences.  Through indifference he accepts letting his suicide be used to the advantage of a cause he despises.  “I decided last night that I didn’t care.” And finally he prepares his deed with a mixed feeling of revolt and freedom.  “I shall kill myself in order to assert my insubordination, my new and dreadful liberty.” It is no longer a question of revenge, but of revolt.  Kirilov is consequently an absurd character—yet with this essential reservation: he kills himself.  But he himself explains this contradiction, and in such a way that at the same time he reveals the absurd secret in all its purity.  In truth, he adds to his fatal logic an extraordinary ambition which gives the character its full perspective: he wants to kill himself to become god.  The reasoning is classic in its clarity.  If God does not exist, Kirilov is god.  If God does not exist, Kirilov must kill himself.  Kirilov must therefore kill himself to become god.  That logic is absurd, but it is what is needed.  The interesting thing, however, is to give a meaning to that divinity brought to earth.  That amounts to clarifying the premise: “If God does not exist, I am god,” which still remains rather obscure.  It is important to note at the outset that the man who flaunts that mad claim is indeed of this world.  He performs his gymnastics every morning to preserve his health.  He is stirred by the joy of Chatov recovering his wife.  On a sheet of paper to be found after his death he wants to draw a face sticking out his tongue at “them.” He is childish and irascible, passionate, methodical, and sensitive.  Of the superman he has nothing but the logic and the obsession, whereas of man he has the whole catalogue.  Yet it is he who speaks calmly of his divinity.  He is not mad, or else Dostoevsky is.  Consequently it is not a megalomaniac’s illusion that excites him.  And taking the words in their specific sense would, in this instance, be ridiculous.  Kirilov himself helps us to understand.  In reply to a question from Stavrogin, he makes clear that he is not talking of a god-man.  It might be thought that this springs from concern to distinguish himself from Christ.  But in reality it is a matter of annexing Christ.  Kirilov in fact fancies for a moment that Jesus at his death did not find himself in Paradise .  He found out then that his torture had been useless.  “The laws of nature,” says the engineer, “made Christ live in the midst of falsehood and die for a falsehood.” Solely in this sense Jesus indeed personifies the whole human drama.  He is the complete man, being the one who realized the most absurd condition.  He is not the God-man but the man-god.  And, like him, each of us can be crucified and victimized—and is to a certain degree.  The divinity in question is therefore altogether terrestrial.  “For three years,” says Kirilov, “I sought the attribute of my divinity and I have found it.  The attribute of my divinity is independence.” Now can be seen the meaning of Kirilov’s premise: “If God does not exist, I am god.” To become god is merely to be free on this earth, not to serve an immortal being.  Above all, of course, it is drawing all the inferences from that painful independence.  If God exists, all depends on him and we can do nothing against his will.  If he does not exist, everything depends on us.  For Kirilov, as for Nietzsche, to kill God is to become god oneself; it is to realize on this earth the eternal life of which the Gospel speaks.  *4 But if this metaphysical crime is enough for man’s fulfillment, why add suicide? Why kill oneself and leave this world after having won freedom? That is contradictory.  Kirilov is well aware of this, for he adds: “If you feel that , you are a tsar and, far from killing yourself, you will live covered with glory.” But men in general do not know it.  They do not feel “that.” As in the time of Prometheus, they entertain blind hopes.  *5 They need to be shown the way and cannot do without preaching.  Consequently, Kirilov must kill himself out of love for humanity.  He must show his brothers a royal and difficult path on which he will be the first.  It is a pedagogical suicide.  Kirilov sacrifices himself, then.  But if he is crucified, he will not be victimized.  He remains the man-god, convinced of a death without future, imbued with evangelical melancholy.  “I,” he says, “am unhappy because I am obliged to assert my freedom.” But once he is dead and men are at last enlightened, this earth will be peopled with tsars and lighted up with human glory.  Kirilov’s pistol shot will be the signal for the last revolution.  Thus, it is not despair that urges him to death, but love of his neighbor for his own sake.  Before terminating in blood an indescribable spiritual adventure, Kirilov makes a remark as old as human suffering: “All is well.” This theme of suicide in Dostoevsky, then, is indeed an absurd theme.  Let us merely note before going on that Kirilov reappears in other characters who themselves set in motion additional absurd themes.  Stavrogin and Ivan Karamazov try out the absurd truths in practical life.  They are the ones liberated by Kirilov’s death.  They try their skill at being tsars.  Stavrogin leads an “ironic” life, and it is well known in what regard.  He arouses hatred around him.  And yet the key to the character is found in his farewell letter: “I have not been able to detest anything.” He is a tsar in indifference.  Ivan is likewise by refusing to surrender the royal powers of the mind.  To those who, like his brother, prove by their lives that it is essential to humiliate oneself in order to believe, he might reply that the condition is shameful.  His key word is: “Everything is permitted,” with the appropriate shade of melancholy.  Of course, like Nietzsche, the most famous of God’s assassins, he ends in madness.  But this is a risk worth running, and, faced with such tragic ends, the essential impulse of the absurd mind is to ask: “What does that prove?” * * * Thus the novels, like the Diary , propound the absurd question.  They establish logic unto death, exaltation, “dreadful” freedom, the glory of the tsars become human.  All is well, everything is permitted, and nothing is hateful—these are absurd judgments.  But what an amazing creation in which those creatures of fire and ice seem so familiar to us.  The passionate world of indifference that rumbles in their hearts does not seem at all monstrous to us.  We recognize in it our everyday anxieties.  And probably no one so much as Dostoevsky has managed to give the absurd world such familiar and tormenting charms.  Yet what is his conclusion? Two quotations will show the complete metaphysical reversal that leads the writer to other revelations.  The argument of the one who commits logical suicide having provoked protests from the critics, Dostoevsky in the following installments of the Diary amplifies his position and concludes thus: “If faith in immortality is so necessary to the human being (that without it he comes to the point of killing himself), it must therefore be the normal state of humanity.  Since this is the case, the immortality of the human soul exists without any doubt.” Then again in the last pages of his last novel, at the conclusion of that gigantic combat with God, some children ask Aliocha: “Karamazov, is it true what religion says, that we shall rise from the dead, that we shall see one another again?” And Aliocha answers: “Certainly, we shall see one another again, we shall joyfully tell one another everything that has happened.” Thus Kirilov, Stavrogin, and Ivan are defeated.  The Brothers Karamazov replies to The Possessed .  And it is indeed a conclusion.  Aliocha’s case is not ambiguous, as is that of Prince Muichkin.  Ill, the latter lives in a perpetual present, tinged with smiles and indifference, and that blissful state might be the eternal life of which the Prince speaks.  On the contrary, Aliocha clearly says: “We shall meet again.” There is no longer any question of suicide and of madness.  What is the use, for anyone who is sure of immortality and of its joys? Man exchanges his divinity for happiness.  “We shall joyfully tell one another everything that has happened.” Thus again Kirilov’s pistol rang out somewhere in Russia, but the world continued to cherish its blind hopes.  Men did not understand “that.” Consequently, it is not an absurd novelist addressing us, but an existential novelist.  Here, too, the leap is touching and gives its nobility to the art that inspires it.  It is a stirring acquiescence, riddled with doubts, uncertain and ardent.  Speaking of The Brothers Karamazov , Dostoevsky wrote: “The chief question that will be pursued throughout this book is the very one from which I have suffered consciously or unconsciously all life long: the existence of God.” It is hard to believe that a novel sufficed to transform into joyful certainty the suffering of a lifetime.  One commentator *6 correctly pointed out that Dostoevsky is on Ivan’s side and that the affirmative chapters took three months of effort whereas what he called “the blasphemies” were written in three weeks in a state of excitement.  There is not one of his characters who does not have that thorn in the flesh, who does not aggravate it or seek a remedy for it in sensation or immortality.  *7 In any case, let us remain with this doubt.  Here is a work which, in a chiaroscuro more gripping than the light of day, permits us to seize man’s struggle against his hopes.  Having reached the end, the creator makes his choice against his characters.  That contradiction thus allows us to make a distinction.  It is not an absurd work that is involved here, but a work that propounds the absurd problem.  Dostoevsky’s reply is humiliation, “shame” according to Stavrogin.  An absurd work, on the contrary, does not provide a reply; that is the whole difference.  Let us note this carefully in conclusion: what contradicts the absurd in that work is not its Christian character, but rather its announcing a future life.  It is possible to be Christian and absurd.  There are examples of Christians who do not believe in a future life.  In regard to the work of art, it should therefore be possible to define one of the directions of the absurd analysis that could have been anticipated in the preceding pages.  It leads to propounding “the absurdity of the Gospel.” It throws light upon this idea, fertile in repercussions, that convictions do not prevent incredulity.  On the contrary, it is easy to see that the author of The Possessed , familiar with these paths, in conclusion took a quite different way.  The surprising reply of the creator to his characters, of Dostoevsky to Kirilov, can indeed be summed up thus: existence is illusory and it is eternal.  Ephemeral Creation At this point I perceive, therefore, that hope cannot be eluded forever and that it can beset even those who wanted to be free of it.  This is the interest I find in the works discussed up to this point.  I could, at least in the realm of creation, list some truly absurd works.  *8 But everything must have a beginning.  The object of this quest is a certain fidelity.  The Church has been so harsh with heretics only because she deemed that there is no worse enemy than a child who has gone astray.  But the record of Gnostic effronteries and the persistence of Manichean currents have contributed more to the construction of orthodox dogma than all the prayers.  With due allowance, the same is true of the absurd.  One recognizes one’s course by discovering the paths that stray from it.  At the very conclusion of the absurd reasoning, in one of the attitudes dictated by its logic, it is not a matter of indifference to find hope coming back in under one of its most touching guises.  That shows the difficulty of the absurd ascesis .  Above all, it shows the necessity of unfailing alertness and thus confirms the general plan of this essay.  But if it is still too early to list absurd works, at least a conclusion can be reached as to the creative attitude, one of those which can complete absurd existence.  Art can never be so well served as by a negative thought.  Its dark and humiliated proceedings are as necessary to the understanding of a great work as black is to white.  To work and create “for nothing,” to sculpture in clay, to know that one’s creation has no future, to see one’s work destroyed in a day while being aware that fundamentally this has no more importance than building for centuries—this is the difficult wisdom that absurd thought sanctions.  Performing these two tasks simultaneously, negating on the one hand and magnifying on the other, is the way open to the absurd creator.  He must give the void its colors.  This leads to a special conception of the work of art.  Too often the work of a creator is looked upon as a series of isolated testimonies.  Thus, artist and man of letters are confused.  A profound thought is in a constant state of becoming; it adopts the experience of a life and assumes its shape.  Likewise, a man’s sole creation is strengthened in its successive and multiple aspects: his works.  One after another, they complement one another, correct or overtake one another, contradict one another too.  If something brings creation to an end, it is not the victorious and illusory cry of the blinded artist: “I have said everything,” but the death of the creator which closes his experience and the book of his genius.  That effort, that superhuman consciousness are not necessarily apparent to the reader.  There is no mystery in human creation.  Will performs this miracle.  But at least there is no true creation without a secret.  To be sure, a succession of works can be but a series of approximations of the same thought.  But it is possible to conceive of another type of creator proceeding by juxtaposition.  Their works may seem to be devoid of interrelations.  To a certain degree, they are contradictory.  But viewed all together, they resume their natural grouping.  From death, for instance, they derive their definitive significance.  They receive their most obvious light from the very life of their author.  At the moment of death, the succession of his works is but a collection of failures.  But if those failures all have the same resonance, the creator has managed to repeat the image of his own condition, to make the air echo with the sterile secret he possesses.  The effort to dominate is considerable here.  But human intelligence is up to much more.  It will merely indicate clearly the voluntary aspect of creation.  Elsewhere I have brought out the fact that human will had no other purpose than to maintain awareness.  But that could not do without discipline.  Of all the schools of patience and lucidity, creation is the most effective.  It is also the staggering evidence of man’s sole dignity: the dogged revolt against his condition, perseverance in an effort considered sterile.  It calls for a daily effort, self-mastery, a precise estimate of the limits of truth, measure, and strength.  It constitutes an ascesis .  All that “for nothing,” in order to repeat and mark time.  But perhaps the great work of art has less importance in itself than in the ordeal it demands of a man and the opportunity it provides him of overcoming his phantoms and approaching a little closer to his naked reality.  * * * Let there be no mistake in æsthetics.  It is not patient inquiry, the unceasing, sterile illustration of a thesis that I am calling for here.  Quite the contrary, if I have made myself clearly understood.  The thesis-novel, the work that proves, the most hateful of all, is the one that most often is inspired by a smug thought.  You demonstrate the truth you feel sure of possessing.  But those are ideas one launches, and ideas are the contrary of thought.  Those creators are philosophers, ashamed of themselves.  Those I am speaking of or whom I imagine are, on the contrary, lucid thinkers.  At a certain point where thought turns back on itself, they raise up the images of their works like the obvious symbols of a limited, mortal, and rebellious thought.  They perhaps prove something.  But those proofs are ones that the novelists provide for themselves rather than for the world in general.  The essential is that the novelists should triumph in the concrete and that this constitute their nobility.  This wholly carnal triumph has been prepared for them by a thought in which abstract powers have been humiliated.  When they are completely so, at the same time the flesh makes the creation shine forth in all its absurd luster.  After all, ironic philosophies produce passionate works.  Any thought that abandons unity glorifies diversity.  And diversity is the home of art.  The only thought to liberate the mind is that which leaves it alone, certain of its limits and of its impending end.  No doctrine tempts it.  It awaits the ripening of the work and of life.  Detached from it, the work will once more give a barely muffled voice to a soul forever freed from hope.  Or it will give voice to nothing if the creator, tired of his activity, intends to turn away.  That is equivalent.  * * * Thus, I ask of absurd creation what I required from thought—revolt, freedom, and diversity.  Later on it will manifest its utter futility.  In that daily effort in which intelligence and passion mingle and delight each other, the absurd man discovers a discipline that will make up the greatest of his strengths.  The required diligence, the doggedness and lucidity thus resemble the conqueror’s attitude.  To create is likewise to give a shape to one’s fate.  For all these characters, their work defines them at least as much as it is defined by them.  The actor taught us this: there is no frontier between being and appearing.  Let me repeat.  None of all this has any real meaning.  On the way to that liberty, there is still a progress to be made.  The final effort for these related minds, creator or conqueror, is to manage to free themselves also from their undertakings: succeed in granting that the very work, whether it be conquest, love, or creation, may well not be; consummate thus the utter futility of any individual life.  Indeed, that gives them more freedom in the realization of that work, just as becoming aware of the absurdity of life authorized them to plunge into it with every excess.  All that remains is a fate whose outcome alone is fatal.  Outside of that single fatality of death, everything, joy or happiness, is liberty.  A world remains of which man is the sole master.  What bound him was the illusion of another world.  The outcome of his thought, ceasing to be renunciatory, flowers in images.  It frolics—in myths, to be sure, but myths with no other depth than that of human suffering and, like it, inexhaustible.  Not the divine fable that amuses and blinds, but the terrestrial face, gesture, and drama in which are summed up a difficult wisdom and an ephemeral passion.  *1 It is curious to note that the most intellectual kind of painting, the one that tries to reduce reality to its essential elements, is ultimately but a visual delight.  All it has kept of the world is its color.  (This is apparent particularly in Léger.) *2 If you stop to think of it, this explains the worst novels.  Almost everybody considers himself capable of thinking and, to a certain degree, whether right or wrong, really does think.  Very few, on the contrary, can fancy themselves poets or artists in words.  But from the moment when thought won out over style, the mob invaded the novel.  That is not such a great evil as is said.  The best are led to make greater demands upon themselves.  As for those who succumb, they did not deserve to survive.  *3 Malraux’s work, for instance.  But it would have been necessary to deal at the same time with the social question which in fact cannot be avoided by absurd thought (even though that thought may put forward several solutions, very different from one another).  One must, however, limit oneself.  *4 “Stavrogin: ‘Do you believe in eternal life in the other world?’ Kirilov: ‘No, but in eternal life in this world.’” *5 “Man simply invented God in order not to kill himself.  That is the summary of universal history down to this moment.” *6 Boris de Schloezer.  *7 Gide’s curious and penetrating remark: almost all Dostoevsky’s heroes are polygamous.  *8 Melville’s Moby Dick , for instance.  The Absurd Man, The Myth of Sisyphus THE ABSURD MAN If Stavrogin believes, he does not think he believes.  If he does not believe, he does not think he does not believe.  —The Possessed “M Y FIELD ,” said Goethe, “is time.” That is indeed the absurd speech.  What, in fact, is the absurd man? He who, without negating it, does nothing for the eternal.  Not that nostalgia is foreign to him.  But he prefers his courage and his reasoning.  The first teaches him to live without appeal and to get along with what he has; the second informs him of his limits.  Assured of his temporally limited freedom, of his revolt devoid of future, and of his mortal consciousness, he lives out his adventure within the span of his lifetime.  That is his field, that is his action, which he shields from any judgment but his own.  A greater life cannot mean for him another life.  That would be unfair.  I am not even speaking here of that paltry eternity that is called posterity.  Mme Roland relied on herself.  That rashness was taught a lesson.  Posterity is glad to quote her remark, but forgets to judge it.  Mme Roland is indifferent to posterity.  There can be no question of holding forth on ethics.  I have seen people behave badly with great morality and I note every day that integrity has no need of rules.  There is but one moral code that the absurd man can accept, the one that is not separated from God: the one that is dictated.  But it so happens that he lives outside that God.  As for the others (I mean also immoralism), the absurd man sees nothing in them but justifications and he has nothing to justify.  I start out here from the principle of his innocence.  That innocence is to be feared.  “Everything is permitted,” exclaims Ivan Karamazov.  That, too, smacks of the absurd.  But on condition that it not be taken in the vulgar sense.  I don’t know whether or not it has been sufficiently pointed out that it is not an outburst of relief or of joy, but rather a bitter acknowledgment of a fact.  The certainty of a God giving a meaning to life far surpasses in attractiveness the ability to behave badly with impunity.  The choice would not be hard to make.  But there is no choice, and that is where the bitterness comes in.  The absurd does not liberate; it binds.  It does not authorize all actions.  “Everything is permitted” does not mean that nothing is forbidden.  The absurd merely confers an equivalence on the consequences of those actions.  It does not recommend crime, for this would be childish, but it restores to remorse its futility.  Likewise, if all experiences are indifferent, that of duty is as legitimate as any other.  One can be virtuous through a whim.  All systems of morality are based on the idea that an action has consequences that legitimize or cancel it.  A mind imbued with the absurd merely judges that those consequences must be considered calmly.  It is ready to pay up.  In other words, there may be responsible persons, but there are no guilty ones, in its opinion.  At very most, such a mind will consent to use past experience as a basis for its future actions.  Time will prolong time, and life will serve life.  In this field that is both limited and bulging with possibilities, everything in himself, except his lucidity, seems unforeseeable to him.  What rule, then, could emanate from that unreasonable order? The only truth that might seem instructive to him is not formal: it comes to life and unfolds in men.  The absurd mind cannot so much expect ethical rules at the end of its reasoning as, rather, illustrations and the breath of human lives.  The few following images are of this type.  They prolong the absurd reasoning by giving it a specific attitude and their warmth.  Do I need to develop the idea that an example is not necessarily an example to be followed (even less so, if possible, in the absurd world) and that these illustrations are not therefore models? Besides the fact that a certain vocation is required for this, one becomes ridiculous, with all due allowance, when drawing from Rousseau the conclusion that one must walk on all fours and from Nietzsche that one must maltreat one’s mother.  “It is essential to be absurd,” writes a modern author, “it is not essential to be a dupe.” The attitudes of which I shall treat can assume their whole meaning only through consideration of their contraries.  A sub-clerk in the post office is the equal of a conqueror if consciousness is common to them.  All experiences are indifferent in this regard.  There are some that do either a service or a disservice to man.  They do him a service if he is conscious.  Otherwise, that has no importance: a man’s failures imply judgment, not of circumstances, but of himself.  I am choosing solely men who aim only to expend themselves or whom I see to be expending themselves.  That has no further implications.  For the moment I want to speak only of a world in which thoughts, like lives, are devoid of future.  Everything that makes man work and get excited utilizes hope.  The sole thought that is not mendacious is therefore a sterile thought.  In the absurd world the value of a notion or of a life is measured by its sterility.  Don Juanism If it were sufficient to love, things would be too easy.  The more one loves, the stronger the absurd grows.  It is not through lack of love that Don Juan goes from woman to woman.  It is ridiculous to represent him as a mystic in quest of total love.  But it is indeed because he loves them with the same passion and each time with his whole self that he must repeat his gift and his profound quest.  Whence each woman hopes to give him what no one has ever given him.  Each time they are utterly wrong and merely manage to make him feel the need of that repetition.  “At last,” exclaims one of them, “I have given you love.” Can we be surprised that Don Juan laughs at this? “At last? No,” he says, “but once more.” Why should it be essential to love rarely in order to love much? * * * Is Don Juan melancholy? This is not likely.  I shall barely have recourse to the legend.  That laugh, the conquering insolence, that playfulness and love of the theater are all clear and joyous.  Every healthy creature tends to multiply himself.  So it is with Don Juan.  But, furthermore, melancholy people have two reasons for being so: they don’t know or they hope.  Don Juan knows and does not hope.  He reminds one of those artists who know their limits, never go beyond them, and in that precarious interval in which they take their spiritual stand enjoy all the wonderful ease of masters.  And that is indeed genius: the intelligence that knows its frontiers.  Up to the frontier of physical death Don Juan is ignorant of melancholy.  The moment he knows, his laugh bursts forth and makes one forgive everything.  He was melancholy at the time when he hoped.  Today, on the mouth of that woman he recognizes the bitter and comforting taste of the only knowledge.  Bitter? Barely: that necessary imperfection that makes happiness perceptible! It is quite false to try to see in Don Juan a man brought up on Ecclesiastes.  For nothing is vanity to him except the hope of another life.  He proves this because he gambles that other life against heaven itself.  Longing for desire killed by satisfaction, that commonplace of the impotent man, does not belong to him.  That is all right for Faust, who believed in God enough to sell himself to the devil.  For Don Juan the thing is simpler.  Molina’s Burlador ever replies to the threats of hell: “What a long respite you give me!” What comes after death is futile, and what a long succession of days for whoever knows how to be alive! Faust craved worldly goods; the poor man had only to stretch out his hand.  It already amounted to selling his soul when he was unable to gladden it.  As for satiety, Don Juan insists upon it, on the contrary.  If he leaves a woman it is not absolutely because he has ceased to desire her.  A beautiful woman is always desirable.  But he desires another, and no, this is not the same thing.  This life gratifies his every wish, and nothing is worse than losing it.  This madman is a great wise man.  But men who live on hope do not thrive in this universe where kindness yields to generosity, affection to virile silence, and communion to solitary courage.  And all hasten to say: “He was a weakling, an idealist or a saint.” One has to disparage the greatness that insults.  * * * People are sufficiently annoyed (or that smile of complicity that debases what it admires) by Don Juan’s speeches and by that same remark that he uses on all women.  But to anyone who seeks quantity in his joys, the only thing that matters is efficacy.  What is the use of complicating the passwords that have stood the test? No one, neither the woman nor the man, listens to them, but rather to the voice that pronounces them.  They are the rule, the convention, and the courtesy.  After they are spoken the most important still remains to be done.  Don Juan is already getting ready for it.  Why should he give himself a problem in morality? He is not like Milosz’s Mañara, who damns himself through a desire to be a saint.  Hell for him is a thing to be provoked.  He has but one reply to divine wrath, and that is human honor: “I have honor,” he says to the Commander, “and I am keeping my promise because I am a knight.” But it would be just as great an error to make an immoralist of him.  In this regard, he is “like everyone else”: he has the moral code of his likes and dislikes.  Don Juan can be properly understood only by constant reference to what he commonly symbolizes: the ordinary seducer and the sexual athlete.  He is an ordinary seducer.  *1 Except for the difference that he is conscious, and that is why he is absurd.  A seducer who has become lucid will not change for all that.  Seducing is his condition in life.  Only in novels does one change condition or become better.  Yet it can be said that at the same time nothing is changed and everything is transformed.  What Don Juan realizes in action is an ethic of quantity, whereas the saint, on the contrary, tends toward quality.  Not to believe in the profound meaning of things belongs to the absurd man.  As for those cordial or wonder-struck faces, he eyes them, stores them up, and does not pause over them.  Time keeps up with him.  The absurd man is he who is not apart from time.  Don Juan does not think of “collecting” women.  He exhausts their number and with them his chances of life.  “Collecting” amounts to being capable of living off one’s past.  But he rejects regret, that other form of hope.  He is incapable of looking at portraits.  * * * Is he selfish for all that? In his way, probably.  But here, too, it is essential to understand one another.  There are those who are made for living and those who are made for loving.  At least Don Juan would be inclined to say so.  But he would do so in a very few words such as he is capable of choosing.  For the love we are speaking of here is clothed in illusions of the eternal.  As all the specialists in passion teach us, there is no eternal love but what is thwarted.  There is scarcely any passion without struggle.  Such a love culminates only in the ultimate contradiction of death.  One must be Werther or nothing.  There, too, there are several ways of committing suicide, one of which is the total gift and forgetfulness of self.  Don Juan, as well as anyone else, knows that this can be stirring.  But he is one of the very few who know that this is not the important thing.  He knows just as well that those who turn away from all personal life through a great love enrich themselves perhaps but certainly impoverish those their love has chosen.  A mother or a passionate wife necessarily has a closed heart, for it is turned away from the world.  A single emotion, a single creature, a single face, but all is devoured.  Quite a different love disturbs Don Juan, and this one is liberating.  It brings with it all the faces in the world, and its tremor comes from the fact that it knows itself to be mortal.  Don Juan has chosen to be nothing.  For him it is a matter of seeing clearly.  We call love what binds us to certain creatures only by reference to a collective way of seeing for which books and legends are responsible.  But of love I know only that mixture of desire, affection, and intelligence that binds me to this or that creature.  That compound is not the same for another person.  I do not have the right to cover all these experiences with the same name.  This exempts one from conducting them with the same gestures.  The absurd man multiplies here again what he cannot unify.  Thus he discovers a new way of being which liberates him at least as much as it liberates those who approach him.  There is no noble love but that which recognizes itself to be both short-lived and exceptional.  All those deaths and all those rebirths gathered together as in a sheaf make up for Don Juan the flowering of his life.  It is his way of giving and of vivifying.  I let it be decided whether or not one can speak of selfishness.  * * * I think at this point of all those who absolutely insist that Don Juan be punished.  Not only in another life, but even in this one.  I think of all those tales, legends, and laughs about the aged Don Juan.  But Don Juan is already ready.  To a conscious man old age and what it portends are not a surprise.  Indeed, he is conscious only in so far as he does not conceal its horror from himself.  There was in Athens a temple dedicated to old age.  Children were taken there.  As for Don Juan, the more people laugh at him, the more his figure stands out.  Thereby he rejects the one the romantics lent him.  No one wants to laugh at that tormented, pitiful Don Juan.  He is pitied; heaven itself will redeem him? But that’s not it.  In the universe of which Don Juan has a glimpse, ridicule too is included.  He would consider it normal to be chastised.  That is the rule of the game.  And, indeed, it is typical of his nobility to have accepted all the rules of the game.  Yet he knows he is right and that there can be no question of punishment.  A fate is not a punishment.  That is his crime, and how easy it is to understand why the men of God call down punishment on his head.  He achieves a knowledge without illusions which negates everything they profess.  Loving and possessing, conquering and consuming—that is his way of knowing.  (There is significance in that favorite Scriptural word that calls the carnal act “knowing.”) He is their worst enemy to the extent that he is ignorant of them.  A chronicler relates that the true Burlador died assassinated by Franciscans who wanted “to put an end to the excesses and blasphemies of Don Juan, whose birth assured him impunity.” Then they proclaimed that heaven had struck him down.  No one has proved that strange end.  Nor has anyone proved the contrary.  But without wondering if it is probable, I can say that it is logical.  I want merely to single out at this point the word “birth” and to play on words: it was the fact of living that assured his innocence.  It was from death alone that he derived a guilt now become legendary.  What else does that stone Commander signify, that cold statue set in motion to punish the blood and courage that dared to think? All the powers of eternal Reason, of order, of universal morality, all the foreign grandeur of a God open to wrath are summed up in him.  That gigantic and soulless stone merely symbolizes the forces that Don Juan negated forever.  But the Commander’s mission stops there.  The thunder and lightning can return to the imitation heaven whence they were called forth.  The real tragedy takes place quite apart from them.  No, it was not under a stone hand that Don Juan met his death.  I am inclined to believe in the legendary bravado, in that mad laughter of the healthy man provoking a non-existent God.  But, above all, I believe that on that evening when Don Juan was waiting at Anna’s the Commander didn’t come, and that after midnight the blasphemer must have felt the dreadful bitterness of those who have been right.  I accept even more readily the account of his life that has him eventually burying himself in a monastery.  Not that the edifying aspect of the story can be considered probable.  What refuge can he go ask of God? But this symbolizes rather the logical outcome of a life completely imbued with the absurd, the grim ending of an existence turned toward short-lived joys.  At this point sensual pleasure winds up in asceticism.  It is essential to realize that they may be, as it were, the two aspects of the same destitution.  What more ghastly image can be called up than that of a man betrayed by his body who, simply because he did not die in time, lives out the comedy while awaiting the end, face to face with that God he does not adore, serving him as he served life, kneeling before a void and arms outstretched toward a heaven without eloquence that he knows to be also without depth? I see Don Juan in a cell of one of those Spanish monasteries lost on a hilltop.  And if he contemplates anything at all, it is not the ghosts of past loves, but perhaps, through a narrow slit in the sun-baked wall, some silent Spanish plain, a noble, soulless land in which he recognizes himself.  Yes, it is on this melancholy and radiant image that the curtain must he rung down.  The ultimate end, awaited but never desired, the ultimate end is negligible.  Drama “The play’s the thing,” says Hamlet, “wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king.” “Catch” is indeed the word.  For conscience moves swiftly or withdraws within itself.  It has to be caught on the wing, at that barely perceptible moment when it glances fleetingly at itself.  The everyday man does not enjoy tarrying.  Everything, on the contrary, hurries him onward.  But at the same time nothing interests him more than himself, especially his potentialities.  Whence his interest in the theater, in the show, where so many fates are offered him, where he can accept the poetry without feeling the sorrow.  There at least can be recognized the thoughtless man, and he continues to hasten toward some hope or other.  The absurd man begins where that one leaves off, where, ceasing to admire the play, the mind wants to enter in.  Entering into all these lives, experiencing them in their diversity, amounts to acting them out.  I am not saying that actors in general obey that impulse, that they are absurd men, but that their fate is an absurd fate which might charm and attract a lucid heart.  It is necessary to establish this in order to grasp without misunderstanding what will follow.  The actor’s realm is that of the fleeting.  Of all kinds of fame, it is known, his is the most ephemeral.  At least, this is said in conversation.  But all kinds of fame are ephemeral.  From the point of view of Sirius, Goethe’s works in ten thousand years will be dust and his name forgotten.  Perhaps a handful of archæologists will look for “evidence” as to our era.  That idea has always contained a lesson.  Seriously meditated upon, it reduces our perturbations to the profound nobility that is found in indifference.  Above all, it directs our concerns toward what is most certain—that is, toward the immediate.  Of all kinds of fame the least deceptive is the one that is lived.  Hence the actor has chosen multiple fame, the fame that is hallowed and tested.  From the fact that everything is to die someday he draws the best conclusion.  An actor succeeds or does not succeed.  A writer has some hope even if he is not appreciated.  He assumes that his works will bear witness to what he was.  At best the actor will leave us a photograph, and nothing of what he was himself, his gestures and his silences, his gasping or his panting with love, will come down to us.  For him, not to be known is not to act, and not acting is dying a hundred times with all the creatures he would have brought to life or resuscitated.  * * * Why should we be surprised to find a fleeting fame built upon the most ephemeral of creations? The actor has three hours to be Iago or Alceste, Phèdre or Gloucester.  In that short space of time he makes them come to life and die on fifty square yards of boards.  Never has the absurd been so well illustrated or at such length.  What more revelatory epitome can be imagined than those marvelous lives, those exceptional and total destinies unfolding for a few hours within a stage set? Off the stage, Sigismundo ceases to count.  Two hours later he is seen dining out.  Then it is, perhaps, that life is a dream.  But after Sigismundo comes another.  The hero suffering from uncertainty takes the place of the man roaring for his revenge.  By thus sweeping over centuries and minds, by miming man as he can be and as he is, the actor has much in common with that other absurd individual, the traveler.  Like him, he drains something and is constantly on the move.  He is a traveler in time and, for the best, the hunted traveler, pursued by souls.  If ever the ethics of quantity could find sustenance, it is indeed on that strange stage.  To what degree the actor benefits from the characters is hard to say.  But that is not the important thing.  It is merely a matter of knowing how far he identifies himself with those irreplaceable lives.  It often happens that he carries them with him, that they somewhat overflow the time and place in which they were born.  They accompany the actor, who cannot very readily separate himself from what he has been.  Occasionally when reaching for his glass he resumes Hamlet’s gesture of raising his cup.  No, the distance separating him from the creatures into whom he infuses life is not so great.  He abundantly illustrates every month or every day that so suggestive truth that there is no frontier between what a man wants to be and what he is.  Always concerned with better representing, he demonstrates to what a degree appearing creates being.  For that is his art—to simulate absolutely, to project himself as deeply as possible into lives that are not his own.  At the end of his effort his vocation becomes clear: to apply himself wholeheartedly to being nothing or to being several.  The narrower the limits allotted him for creating his character, the more necessary his talent.  He will die in three hours under the mask he has assumed today.  Within three hours he must experience and express a whole exceptional life.  That is called losing oneself to find oneself.  In those three hours he travels the whole course of the dead-end path that the man in the audience takes a lifetime to cover.  * * * A mime of the ephemeral, the actor trains and perfects himself only in appearances.  The theatrical convention is that the heart expresses itself and communicates itself only through gestures and in the body—or through the voice, which is as much of the soul as of the body.  The rule of that art insists that everything be magnified and translated into flesh.  If it were essential on the stage to love as people really love, to employ that irreplaceable voice of the heart, to look as people contemplate in life, our speech would be in code.  But here silences must make themselves heard.  Love speaks up louder, and immobility itself becomes spectacular.  The body is king.  Not everyone can be “theatrical,” and this unjustly maligned word covers a whole æsthetic and a whole ethic.  Half a man’s life is spent in implying, in turning away, and in keeping silent.  Here the actor is the intruder.  He breaks the spell chaining that soul, and at last the passions can rush onto their stage.  They speak in every gesture; they live only through shouts and cries.  Thus the actor creates his characters for display.  He outlines or sculptures them and slips into their imaginary form, transfusing his blood into their phantoms.  I am of course speaking of great drama, the kind that gives the actor an opportunity to fulfill his wholly physical fate.  Take Shakespeare, for instance.  In that impulsive drama the physical passions lead the dance.  They explain everything.  Without them all would collapse.  Never would King Lear keep the appointment set by madness without the brutal gesture that exiles Cordelia and condemns Edgar.  It is just that the unfolding of that tragedy should thenceforth be dominated by madness.  Souls are given over to the demons and their saraband.  No fewer than four madmen: one by trade, another by intention, and the last two through suffering—four disordered bodies, four unutterable aspects of a single condition.  The very scale of the human body is inadequate.  The mask and the buskin, the make-up that reduces and accentuates the face in its essential elements, the costume that exaggerates and simplifies—that universe sacrifices everything to appearance and is made solely for the eye.  Through an absurd miracle, it is the body that also brings knowledge.  I should never really understand Iago unless I played his part.  It is not enough to hear him, for I grasp him only at the moment when I see him.  Of the absurd character the actor consequently has the monotony, that single, oppressive silhouette, simultaneously strange and familiar, that he carries about from hero to hero.  There, too, the great dramatic work contributes to this unity of tone.  *2 This is where the actor contradicts himself: the same and yet so various, so many souls summed up in a single body.  Yet it is the absurd contradiction itself, that individual who wants to achieve everything and live everything, that useless attempt, that ineffectual persistence.  What always contradicts itself nevertheless joins in him.  He is at that point where body and mind converge, where the mind, tired of its defeats, turns toward its most faithful ally.  “And blest are those,” says Hamlet, “whose blood and judgment are so well commingled that they are not a pipe for fortune’s finger to sound what stop she please.” * * * How could the Church have failed to condemn such a practice on the part of the actor? She repudiated in that art the heretical multiplication of souls, the emotional debauch, the scandalous presumption of a mind that objects to living but one life and hurls itself into all forms of excess.  She proscribed in them that preference for the present and that triumph of Proteus which are the negation of everything she teaches.  Eternity is not a game.  A mind foolish enough to prefer a comedy to eternity has lost its salvation.  Between “everywhere” and “forever” there is no compromise.  Whence that much maligned profession can give rise to a tremendous spiritual conflict.  “What matters,” said Nietzsche, “is not eternal life but eternal vivacity.” All drama is, in fact, in this choice.  Adrienne Lecouvreur on her deathbed was willing to confess and receive communion, but refused to abjure her profession.  She thereby lost the benefit of the confession.  Did this not amount, in effect, to choosing her absorbing passion in preference to God? And that woman in the death throes refusing in tears to repudiate what she called her art gave evidence of a greatness that she never achieved behind the footlights.  This was her finest role and the hardest one to play.  Choosing between heaven and a ridiculous fidelity, preferring oneself to eternity or losing oneself in God is the age-old tragedy in which each must play his part.  The actors of the era knew they were excommunicated.  Entering the profession amounted to choosing Hell.  And the Church discerned in them her worst enemies.  A few men of letters protest: “What! Refuse the last rites to Molière!” But that was just, and especially in one who died onstage and finished under the actor’s make-up a life entirely devoted to dispersion.  In his case genius is invoked, which excuses everything.  But genius excuses nothing, just because it refuses to do so.  The actor knew at that time what punishment was in store for him.  But what significance could such vague threats have compared to the final punishment that life itself was reserving for him? This was the one that he felt in advance and accepted wholly.  To the actor as to the absurd man, a premature death is irreparable.  Nothing can make up for the sum of faces and centuries he would otherwise have traversed.  But in any case, one has to die.  For the actor is doubtless everywhere, but time sweeps him along, too, and makes its impression with him.  It requires but a little imagination to feel what an actor’s fate means.  It is in time that he makes up and enumerates his characters.  It is in time likewise that he learns to dominate them.  The greater number of different lives he has lived, the more aloof he can be from them.  The time comes when he must die to the stage and for the world.  What he has lived faces him.  He sees clearly.  He feels the harrowing and irreplaceable quality of that adventure.  He knows and can now die.  There are homes for aged actors.  Conquest “No,” says the conqueror, “don’t assume that because I love action I have had to forget how to think.  On the contrary I can thoroughly define what I believe.  For I believe it firmly and I see it surely and clearly.  Beware of those who say: ‘I know this too well to be able to express it.’ For if they cannot do so, this is because they don’t know it or because out of laziness they stopped at the outer crust.  “I have not many opinions.  At the end of a life man notices that he has spent years becoming sure of a single truth.  But a single truth, if it is obvious, is enough to guide an existence.  As for me, I decidedly have something to say about the individual.  One must speak of him bluntly and, if need be, with the appropriate contempt.  “A man is more a man through the things he keeps to himself than through those he says.  There are many that I shall keep to myself.  But I firmly believe that all those who have judged the individual have done so with much less experience than we on which to base their judgment.  The intelligence, the stirring intelligence perhaps foresaw what it was essential to note.  But the era, its ruins, and its blood overwhelm us with facts.  It was possible for ancient nations, and even for more recent ones down to our machine age, to weigh one against the other the virtues of society and of the individual, to try to find out which was to serve the other.  To begin with, that was possible by virtue of that stubborn aberration in man’s heart according to which human beings were created to serve or be served.  In the second place, it was possible because neither society nor the individual had yet revealed all their ability.  “I have seen bright minds express astonishment at the masterpieces of Dutch painters born at the height of the bloody wars in Flanders, be amazed by the prayers of Silesian mystics brought up during the frightful Thirty Years’ War.  Eternal values survive secular turmoils before their astonished eyes.  But there has been progress since.  The painters of today are deprived of such serenity.  Even if they have basically the heart the creator needs—I mean the closed heart—it is of no use; for everyone, including the saint himself, is mobilized.  This is perhaps what I have felt most deeply.  At every form that miscarries in the trenches, at every outline, metaphor, or prayer crushed under steel, the eternal loses a round.  Conscious that I cannot stand aloof from my time, I have decided to be an integral part of it.  This is why I esteem the individual only because he strikes me as ridiculous and humiliated.  Knowing that there are no victorious causes, I have a liking for lost causes: they require an uncontaminated soul, equal to its defeat as to its temporary victories.  For anyone who feels bound up with this world’s fate, the clash of civilizations has something agonizing about it.  I have made that anguish mine at the same time that I wanted to join in.  Between history and the eternal I have chosen history because I like certainties.  Of it, at least, I am certain, and how can I deny this force crushing me? “There always comes a time when one must choose between contemplation and action.  This is called becoming a man.  Such wrenches are dreadful.  But for a proud heart there can be no compromise.  There is God or time, that cross or this sword.  This world has a higher meaning that transcends its worries, or nothing is true but those worries.  One must live with time and die with it, or else elude it for a greater life.  I know that one can compromise and live in the world while believing in the eternal.  That is called accepting.  But I loathe this term and want all or nothing.  If I choose action, don’t think that contemplation is like an unknown country to me.  But it cannot give me everything, and, deprived of the eternal, I want to ally myself with time.  I do not want to put down to my account either nostalgia or bitterness, and I merely want to see clearly.  I tell you, tomorrow you will be mobilized.  For you and for me that is a liberation.  The individual can do nothing and yet he can do everything.  In that wonderful unattached state you understand why I exalt and crush him at one and the same time.  It is the world that pulverizes him and I who liberate him.  I provide him with all his rights.  * * * “Conquerors know that action is in itself useless.  There is but one useful action, that of remaking man and the earth.  I shall never remake men.  But one must do as if.’ For the path of struggle leads me to the flesh.  Even humiliated, the flesh is my only certainty.  I can live only on it.  The creature is my native land.  This is why I have chosen this absurd and ineffectual effort.  This is why I am on the side of the struggle.  The epoch lends itself to this, as I have said.  Hitherto the greatness of a conqueror was geographical.  It was measured by the extent of the conquered territories.  There is a reason why the word has changed in meaning and has ceased to signify the victorious general.  The greatness has changed camp.  It lies in protest and the blind-alley sacrifice.  There, too, it is not through a preference for defeat.  Victory would be desirable.  But there is but one victory, and it is eternal.  That is the one I shall never have.  That is where I stumble and cling.  A revolution is always accomplished against the gods, beginning with the revolution of Prometheus, the first of modern conquerors.  It is man’s demands made against his fate; the demands of the poor are but a pretext.  Yet I can seize that spirit only in its historical act, and that is where I make contact with it.  Don’t assume, however, that I take pleasure in it: opposite the essential contradiction, I maintain my human contradiction.  I establish my lucidity in the midst of what negates it.  I exalt man before what crushes him, and my freedom, my revolt, and my passion come together then in that tension, that lucidity, and that vast repetition.  “Yes, man is his own end.  And he is his only end.  If he aims to be something, it is in this life.  Now I know it only too well.  Conquerors sometimes talk of vanquishing and overcoming.  But it is always ‘overcoming oneself that they mean.  You are well aware of what that means.  Every man has felt himself to be the equal of a god at certain moments.  At least, this is the way it is expressed.  But this comes from the fact that in a flash he felt the amazing grandeur of the human mind.  The conquerors are merely those among men who are conscious enough of their strength to be sure of living constantly on those heights and fully aware of that grandeur.  It is a question of arithmetic, of more or less.  The conquerors are capable of the more.  But they are capable of no more than man himself when he wants.  This is why they never leave the human crucible, plunging into the seething soul of revolutions.  “There they find the creature mutilated, but they also encounter there the only values they like and admire, man and his silence.  This is both their destitution and their wealth.  There is but one luxury for them—that of human relations.  How can one fail to realize that in this vulnerable universe everything that is human and solely human assumes a more vivid meaning? Taut faces, threatened fraternity, such strong and chaste friendship among men—these are the true riches because they are transitory.  In their midst the mind is most aware of its powers and limitations.  That is to say, its efficacity.  Some have spoken of genius.  But genius is easy to say; I prefer the intelligence.  It must be said that it can be magnificent then.  It lights up this desert and dominates it.  It knows its obligations and illustrates them.  It will die at the same time as this body.  But knowing this constitutes its freedom.  * * * “We are not ignorant of the fact that all churches are against us.  A heart so keyed up eludes the eternal, and all churches, divine or political, lay claim to the eternal.  Happiness and courage, retribution or justice are secondary ends for them.  It is a doctrine they bring, and one must subscribe to it.  But I have no concern with ideas or with the eternal.  The truths that come within my scope can be touched with the hand.  I cannot separate from them.  This is why you cannot base anything on me: nothing of the conqueror lasts, not even his doctrines.  “At the end of all that, despite everything, is death.  We know also that it ends everything.  This is why those cemeteries all over Europe, which obsess some among us, are hideous.  People beautify only what they love, and death repels us and tires our patience.  It, too, is to be conquered.  The last Carrara, a prisoner in Padua emptied by the plague and besieged by the Venetians, ran screaming through the halls of his deserted palace: he was calling on the devil and asking him for death.  This was a way of overcoming it.  And it is likewise a mark of courage characteristic of the Occident to have made so ugly the places where death thinks itself honored.  In the rebel’s universe, death exalts injustice.  It is the supreme abuse.  “Others, without compromising either, have chosen the eternal and denounced the illusion of this world.  Their cemeteries smile amid numerous flowers and birds.  That suits the conqueror and gives him a clear image of what he has rejected.  He has chosen, on the contrary, the black iron fence or the potter’s field.  The best among the men of God occasionally are seized with fright mingled with consideration and pity for minds that can live with such an image of their death.  Yet those minds derive their strength and justification from this.  Our fate stands before us and we provoke him.  Less out of pride than out of awareness of our ineffectual condition.  We, too, sometimes feel pity for ourselves.  It is the only compassion that seems acceptable to us: a feeling that perhaps you hardly understand and that seems to you scarcely virile.  Yet the most daring among us are the ones who feel it.  But we call the lucid ones virile and we do not want a strength that is apart from lucidity.” * * * Let me repeat that these images do not propose moral codes and involve no judgments: they are sketches.  They merely represent a style of life.  The lover, the actor, or the adventurer plays the absurd.  But equally well, if he wishes, the chaste man, the civil servant, or the president of the Republic.  It is enough to know and to mask nothing.  In Italian museums are sometimes found little painted screens that the priest used to hold in front of the face of condemned men to hide the scaffold from them.  The leap in all its forms, rushing into the divine or the eternal, surrendering to the illusions of the everyday or of the idea—all these screens hide the absurd.  But there are civil servants without screens, and they are the ones of whom I mean to speak.  I have chosen the most extreme ones.  At this level the absurd gives them a royal power.  It is true that those princes are without a kingdom.  But they have this advantage over others: they know that all royalties are illusory.  They know that is their whole nobility, and it is useless to speak in relation to them of hidden misfortune or the ashes of disillusion.  Being deprived of hope is not despairing.  The flames of earth are surely worth celestial perfumes.  Neither I nor anyone can judge them here.  They are not striving to be better; they are attempting to be consistent.  If the term “wise man” can be applied to the man who lives on what he has without speculating on what he has not, then they are wise men.  One of them, a conqueror but in the realm of mind, a Don Juan but of knowledge, an actor but of the intelligence, knows this better than anyone: “You nowise deserve a privilege on earth and in heaven for having brought to perfection your dear little meek sheep; you nonetheless continue to be at best a ridiculous dear little sheep with horns and nothing more—even supposing that you do not burst with vanity and do not create a scandal by posing as a judge.” In any case, it was essential to restore to the absurd reasoning more cordial examples.  The imagination can add many others, inseparable from time and exile, who likewise know how to live in harmony with a universe without future and without weakness.  This absurd, godless world is, then, peopled with men who think clearly and have ceased to hope.  And I have not yet spoken of the most absurd character, who is the creator.  *1 In the fullest sense and with his faults.  A healthy attitude also includes faults.  *2 At this point I am thinking of Molière’s Alceste.  Everything is so simple, so obvious and so coarse.  Alceste against Philinte, Célimène against Elianthe, the whole subject in the absurd consequence of a nature carried to its extreme, and the verse itself, the “bad verse,” barely accented like the monotony of the character’s nature.  Fear and Trembling Problema I Is There a Teleological Suspension of the Ethical? The ethical as such is the universal, and as the universal it applies to everyone, which can be put from another point of view by saying that it applies at every moment.  It rests immanently in itself, has nothing outside itself that is its telos end, purpose but is itself the telos for everything outside, and when that is taken up into it, it has no further to go.  Seen as an immediate, no more than sensate and psychic, being, the single individual is the particular that has its telos in the universal, and the individual’s ethical task is always to express himself in this, to abrogate his particularity so as to become the universal.  As soon as the single individual wants to assert himself in his particularity, in direct opposition to the universal, he sins, and only by recognizing this can he again reconcile himself with the universal.  Whenever, having entered the universal, the single individual feels an urge to assert his particularity, he is in a state of temptation, from which he can extricate himself only by surrendering his particularity to the universal in repentance.  If that is the highest that can be said of man and his existence, then the ethical and a person’s eternal blessedness, which is his telos in all eternity and at every moment, are identical; for in that case it would be a contradiction to say that one surrendered that telos (i.e.  suspended it teleologically) since by suspending the telos one would be forfeiting it, while what is said to be suspended in this sense is not forfeited but preserved in something higher, the latter being precisely its telos.  If that is the case, then Hegel is right in his ‘Good and Conscience’ where he discusses man seen merely as the single individual and regards this way of seeing him as a ‘moral form of evil’ to be annulled in the teleology of the ethical life, so that the individual who stays at this stage is either in sin or in a state of temptation.  Where Hegel goes wrong, on the other hand, is in talking about faith, in not protesting loudly and clearly against the honour and glory enjoyed by Abraham as the father of faith when he should really be remitted to some lower court for trial and exposed as a murderer.  For faith is just this paradox, that the single individual is higher than the universal, though in such a way, be it noted, that the movement is repeated, that is, that, having been in the universal, the single individual now sets himself apart as the particular above the universal.  If that is not faith, then Abraham is done for and faith has never existed in the world, just because it has always existed.  For if the ethical life is the highest and nothing incommensurable is left over in man, except in the sense of what is evil, i.e.  the single individual who is to be expressed in the universal, then one needs no other categories than those of the Greek philosophers, or whatever can be logically deduced from them.  This is something Hegel, who has after all made some study of the Greeks, ought not to have kept quiet about.  One not infrequently hears people who prefer to lose themselves in clichés rather than studies say that light shines over the Christian world, while paganism is shrouded in darkness.  This kind of talk has always struck me as strange, since any reasonably deep thinker, any reasonably serious artist will still seek rejuvenation in the eternal youth of the Greeks.  The explanation may be that they know not what to say, only that they have to say something.  There is nothing wrong with saying that paganism did not have faith, but if this is to mean anything one must be a little clearer what one means by faith, otherwise one falls back into those clichés.  It is easy to explain the whole of existence, faith included, and he is not the worst reckoner in life who counts on being admired for having such an explanation: for it is as Boileau says: ‘un sot trouve toujours un plus sot, qui l’admire’ ‘a fool can always find a greater fool who admires him’.  Faith is just this paradox, that the single individual as the particular is higher than the universal, is justified before the latter, not as subordinate but superior, though in such a way, be it noted, that it is the single individual who, having been subordinate to the universal as the particular, now by means of the universal becomes that individual who, as the particular, stands in an absolute relation to the absolute.  This position cannot be mediated, for all mediation occurs precisely by virtue of the universal; it is and remains in all eternity a paradox, inaccessible to thought.  And yet faith is this paradox.  Or else (these are implications which I would ask the reader always to bear in mind, though it would be too complicated for me to spell them out each time) - or else faith has never existed just because it has always existed.  And Abraham is done for.  That the individual can easily take this paradox for a temptation is true enough.  But one should not keep it quiet on that account.  True enough, too, that many people may have a natural aversion to the paradox, but that is no reason for making faith into something else so that they too can have it; while those who do have faith should be prepared to offer some criterion for distinguishing the paradox from a temptation.  Now the story of Abraham contains just such a teleological suspension of the ethical.  There has been no want of sharp intellects and sound scholars who have found analogies to it.  Their wisdom amounts to the splendid principle that basically everything is the same.  If one looks a little closer I doubt very much whether one will find in the whole world a single analogy, except a later one that proves nothing, for the fact remains that Abraham represents faith, and that faith finds its proper expression in him whose life is not only the most paradoxical conceivable, but so paradoxical that it simply cannot be thought.  He acts on the strength of the absurd; for it is precisely the absurd that as the single individual he is higher than the universal.  This paradox cannot be mediated; for as soon as he tries Abraham will have to admit that he is in a state of temptation, and in that case he will never sacrifice Isaac, or if he has done so he must return repentantly to the universal.  On the strength of the absurd he got Isaac back.  Abraham is therefore at no instant the tragic hero, but something quite different, either a murderer or a man of faith.  The middle-term that saves the tragic hero is something Abraham lacks.  That is why I can understand a tragic hero, but not Abraham, even though in a certain lunatic sense I admire him more than all others.  Abraham’s relation to Isaac, ethically speaking, is quite simply this, that the father should love the son more than himself.  Yet within its own compass the ethical has several rankings; let us see whether this story contains any such higher expression of the ethical which might explain his behaviour ethically, justify him ethically for suspending the ethical duty to the son, yet without thereby exceeding the ethical’s own teleology.  When an enterprise involving a whole nation is prevented, when such an enterprise is brought to a halt by heaven’s disfavour, when divine wrath sends a dead calm which mocks every effort, when the soothsayer performs his sad task and proclaims that the deity demands a young girl as a sacrifice - then it is with heroism that the father has to make that sacrifice.  Nobly will he hide his grief though he could wish he were ‘the lowly man who dares to weep’ and not the king who must bear himself as befits a king.  And however solitarily the pain enters his breast, for he has only three confidants among his people, soon the entire population will be privy to his pain, but also to his deed, to the fact that for the well-being of the whole he was willing to offer that girl, his daughter, this lovely young maiden.  Oh, what bosom! What fair cheeks! What flaxen hair! And the daughter will touch him with her tears, and the father avert his face, but the hero will raise the knife.  And when the news of this reaches the ancestral home all the beauteous maidens of Greece will blush with animation, and were the daughter a bride the betrothed would not be angered but proud to have been party to the father’s deed, because the maiden belonged to him more tenderly than to the father.  When that bold judge, who saved Israel in the hour of need binds God and himself in one breath with the same promise, then it is with heroism that he is to transform the young girl’s jubilation, the beloved daughter’s joy, to sorrow, and all Israel will grieve with her maidenly youth; but every free-born man will understand Jephthah, every stout-hearted woman admire him, and every maiden in Israel will want to do as his daughter; for what good would it be for Jephthah to triumph by making his promise but fail to keep it? Would the victory not be taken once more from the people? When a son forgets his duty, when the State entrusts the father with the sword of judgement, when the laws demand punishment at the father’s hand, then it is with heroism that the father must forget that the guilty one is his son.  Nobly will he hide his pain, but in the nation there will be not one, not even the son, who fails to admire the father, and every time the laws of Rome are interpreted it will be recalled that many interpreted them more learnedly but none more gloriously than Brutus.  On the other hand, if it had been while his fleet was being borne by wind under full sail to its destination that Agamemnon had sent that messenger who brought Iphigenia to the sacrifice; if unbound by any promise that would decide the fate of his people Jephthah had said to his daughter: ‘Sorrow now for two months henceforth over the short day of your youth, for I shall sacrifice you’; if Brutus had had a righteous son and still called upon the lictors to execute him - who would understand them? If to the question, why did you do it?, these three had replied: ‘It is a trial in which we are being tested’, would one then have understood them better? When at the decisive moment Agamemnon, Jephthah, and Brutus heroically overcome their pain, have heroically given up the loved one, and have only the outward deed to perform, then never a noble soul in the world will there be but sheds tears of sympathy for their pain, tears of admiration for their deed.  But if at that decisive moment these three men had added to the heroism with which they bore their pain the little words ‘It won’t happen’, who then would understand them? If in explanation they added: ‘We believe it on the strength of the absurd’, who then would understand them better? For who would not readily understand that it was absurd? But who would understand that for that reason one could believe it? The difference between the tragic hero and Abraham is obvious enough.  The tragic hero stays within the ethical.  He lets an expression of the ethical have its telos in a higher expression of the ethical; he reduces the ethical relation between father and son, or daughter and father, to a sentiment that has its dialectic in its relation to the idea of the ethical life.  Here, then, there can be no question of a teleological suspension of the ethical itself.  With Abraham it is different.  In his action he overstepped the ethical altogether, and had a higher telos outside it, in relation to which he suspended it.  For how could one ever bring Abraham’s action into relationship with the universal? How could any point of contact ever be discovered between what Abraham did and the universal other than that Abraham overstepped it? It is not to save a nation, not to uphold the idea of the State, that Abraham did it, not to appease angry gods.  If there was any question of the deity’s being angry, it could only have been Abraham he was angry with, and Abraham’s whole action stands in no relation to the universal, it is a purely private undertaking.  While, then, the tragic hero is great through his deed’s being an expression of the ethical life, Abraham is great through an act of purely personal virtue.  There is no higher expression of the ethical in Abraham’s life than that the father shall love the son.  The ethical in the sense of the ethical life is quite out of the question.  In so far as the universal was there at all it was latent in Isaac, concealed as it were in his loins, and it would have to cry out with Isaac’s mouth: ‘Don’t do it, you are destroying everything.’ Then why does Abraham do it? For God’s sake, and what is exactly the same, for his own.  He does it for the sake of God because God demands this proof of his faith; he does it for his own sake in order to be able to produce the proof.  The unity here is quite properly expressed in the saying in which this relationship has always been described: it is a trial, a temptation.  A temptation, but what does that mean? What we usually call a temptation is something that keeps a person from carrying out a duty, but here the temptation is the ethical itself which would keep him from doing God’s will.  But then what is the duty? For the duty is precisely the expression of God’s will.  Here we see the need for a new category for understanding Abraham.  Such a relationship to the divine is unknown to paganism.  The tragic hero enters into no private relationship with God, but the ethical is the divine and therefore the paradox in the divine can be mediated in the universal.  Abraham cannot be mediated, which can also be put by saying he cannot speak.  The moment I speak I express the universal, and when I do not no one can understand me.  So the moment Abraham wants to express himself in the universal, he has to say that his situation is one of temptation, for he has no higher expression of the universal that overrides the universal he transgresses.  Thus while Abraham arouses my admiration, he also appals me.  The person who denies himself and sacrifices himself for duty gives up the finite in order to grasp on to the infinite; he is secure enough.  The tragic hero gives up what is certain for what is still more certain, and the eye of the beholder rests confidently upon him.  But the person who gives up the universal to grasp something still higher that is not the universal, what does he do? Can this be anything but temptation? And if it were something else but the individual were mistaken, what salvation is there for him? He suffers all the pain of the tragic hero, he brings all his joy in the world to nothing, he abandons everything, and perhaps the same instant debars himself from that exalted joy so precious to him that he would buy it at any price.  That person the beholder cannot at all understand, nor let his eye rest upon him with confidence.  Perhaps what the believer intends just cannot be done, after all it is unthinkable.  Or if it could be done and the individual had misunderstood the deity, what salvation would there be for him? The tragic hero, he needs tears and he claims them; yes, where was that envious eye so barren as not to weep with Agamemnon, but where was he whose soul was so confused as to presume to weep for Abraham? The tragic hero has done with his deed at a definite moment in time, but in the course of time he achieves something no less important, he seeks out the one whose soul is beset with sorrow, whose breast cannot draw air for its stifled sighs, whose thoughts, weighed down with tears, hang heavy upon him; he appears before him, he breaks the spell of grief, loosens the corset, coaxes forth the tear by making the sufferer forget his own suffering in his.  Abraham one cannot weep over.  One approaches him with a horror religiosus holy terror like that in which Israel approached Mount Sinai.  What if the lonely man who climbs the mountain in Moriah, whose peak soars heaven-high over the plains of Aulis, is not a sleepwalker who treads surefootedly over the abyss, while someone standing at the foot of the mountain, seeing him there, trembles with anxiety and out of respect and fear dares not even shout to him - what if he should be distracted, what if he has made a mistake? - Thanks! And thanks again, to whoever holds out to one who has been assaulted and left naked by life’s sorrows, holds out to him the leaf of the word with which to hide his misery.  Thanks to you, great Shakespeare!, you who can say everything, everything, everything exactly as it is - and yet why was this torment one you never gave voice to? Was it perhaps that you kept it to yourself, like the beloved whose name one still cannot bear the world to mention? For a poet buys this power of words to utter all the grim secrets of others at the cost of a little secret he himself cannot utter, and a poet is not an apostle, he casts devils out only by the power of the devil.  But now when the ethical is thus teleologically suspended, how does the single individual in whom it is suspended exist? He exists as the particular in opposition to the universal.  Does this mean he sins? For this is the form of sin looked at ideally, just as the fact that the child does not sin because it is not conscious of its own existence as such does not mean that, looked at ideally, its existence is not that of sin or that the ethical does not make its demands of the child at every moment.  If this form cannot be said to repeat itself in a way other than that of sin, then judgement has been delivered upon Abraham.  Then how did Abraham exist? He had faith.  That is the paradox that keeps him at the extremity and which he cannot make clear to anyone else, for the paradox is that he puts himself as the single individual in an absolute relation to the absolute.  Is he justified? His justification is, once again, the paradox; for if he is the paradox it is not by virtue of being anything universal, but of being the particular.  How does the single individual assure himself that he is justified? It is a simple enough matter to level the whole of existence down to the idea of the State or to a concept of society.  If one does that one can no doubt also mediate; for in this way one does not come to the paradox at all, to the single individual’s as such being higher than the universal, which I can also put pointedly in a proposition of Pythagoras‘s, that the odd numbers are more perfect than the even.  Should one happen to catch word of an answer in the direction of the paradox in our time, it will no doubt go like this: ‘That’s to be judged by the outcome.’ A hero who has become the scandal of his generation, aware that he is a paradox that cannot be understood, cries undaunted to his contemporaries: ‘The future will show I was right!’ This cry is heard less frequently nowadays, for as our age to its detriment produces no heroes, so it has the advantage that it also produces few caricatures.  Whenever nowadays we hear the words ‘That’s to be judged by the outcome’ we know immediately with whom we have the honour of conversing.  Those who speak thus are a populous tribe which, to give them a common name, I shall call the ‘lecturers’.  They live in their thoughts, secure in life, they have a permanent position and sure prospects in a well-organized State; they are separated by centuries, even millennia, from the convulsions of existence; they have no fear that such things could happen again; what would the police and the newspapers say? Their lifework is to judge the great, to judge them according to the outcome.  Such conduct in respect of greatness betrays a strange mixture of arrogance and pitifulness, arrogance because they feel called to pass judgement, pitifulness because they feel their lives unrelated in even the remotest manner to those of the great.  Surely anyone with a speck of erectior ingenii nobility of mind cannot become so completely the cold and clammy mollusc as to lose sight altogether, in approaching the great, of the fact that ever since the Creation it has been accepted practice for the outcome to come last, and that if one is really to learn something from the great it is precisely the beginning one must attend to.  If anyone on the verge of action should judge himself according to the outcome, he would never begin.  Even though the result may gladden the whole world, that cannot help the hero; for he knows the result only when the whole thing is over, and that is not how he becomes a hero, but by virtue of the fact that he began.  But in any case the outcome in its dialectic (in so far as it is finitude’s answer to the infinite question) is totally incompatible with the existence of the hero.  Or are we to take it that Abraham was justified in relating himself as the single individual to the universal by the fact that he got Isaac by a marvel? Had Abraham actually sacrificed Isaac, would that have meant he was less justified? But it is the outcome that arouses our curiosity, as with the conclusion of a book; one wants nothing of the fear, the distress, the paradox.  One flirts with the outcome aesthetically; it comes as unexpectedly and yet as effortlessly as a prize in the lottery; and having heard the outcome one is improved.  And yet no robber of temples hard-labouring in chains is so base a criminal as he who plunders the holy in this way, and not even Judas, who sold his master for thirty pieces of silver, is more contemptible than the person who would thus offer greatness for sale.  It goes against my nature to speak inhumanly of greatness, to let its grandeur fade into an indistinct outline at an immense distance, or represent it as great without the human element in it coming to the fore - whence it ceases to be the great; for it is not what happens to me that makes me great, but what I do, and there is surely no one who thinks that anyone became great by winning the big lottery prize.  Even of a person born in humble circumstances I ask that he should not be so inhuman towards himself as to be unable to think of the king’s castle except at a distance and by dreaming of its grandeur indistinctly, wanting to exalt it and simultaneously destroying its grandeur by exalting it in such a debasing way.  I ask that he be human enough to approach and bear himself with confidence and dignity there too.  He should not be so inhuman as shamelessly to want to violate every rule of respect by storming into the king’s salon straight from the street - he loses more by doing that than the king; on the contrary he should find pleasure in observing every rule of decorum with a glad and confident enthusiasm, which is just what will make him frank and open-hearted.  This is only an analogy, for the difference here is only a very imperfect expression of the spiritual distance.  I ask everyone not to think so inhumanly of himself as to dare not set foot in those palaces where not just the memory of the chosen lives on but the chosen themselves.  He should not push himself shamelessly forward and thrust upon them his kinship with them, he should feel happy every time he bows before them, but be frank and confident and always something more than a cleaning woman; for unless he wants to be more than that he will never come in there.  And what will help him are exactly the fear and distress in which the great are tried, for otherwise, at least if there is a drop of red blood in him, they will merely arouse his righteous envy.  And whatever can only be great at a distance, whatever people want to exalt with empty and hollow phrases, that they themselves reduce to nothing.  Was there ever in the world anyone as great as that blessed woman, the mother of God, the Virgin Mary? And yet how do people speak of her? To say she was favoured among women doesn’t make her great, and if it were not for the odd fact that those who listen can think as inhumanly as those who speak, surely every young girl would ask, why am I not favoured too? And had I nothing more to say I should by no means dismiss such a question as stupid; for as regards favours, abstractly considered, everyone is equally entitled.  What is left out is the distress, the fear, the paradox.  My thought is as pure as the next man’s and surely the thought of anyone able to think in this way will be pure; if not, something dreadful is in store; for a person who has once called these images to mind cannot be rid of them again, and if he sins against them, then in their quiet wrath, more terrifying than the clamour of ten voracious critics, they will wreak their awful vengeance on him.  No doubt Mary bore the child miraculously, but it went with Mary ‘after the manner of women’, and such a time is one of fear, distress, and paradox.  No doubt the angel was a ministering spirit, but he was not an obliging one who went round to all the other young girls in Israel and said: ‘Do not despise Mary, something out of the ordinary is happening to her.’ The angel came only to Mary, and no one could understand her.  Yet what woman was done greater indignity than Mary, and isn’t it true here too that those whom God blesses he damns in the same breath? This is the spirit’s understanding of Mary, and she is not at all - as it offends me to say, though even more so that people have mindlessly and irresponsibly thought of her thus - she is not at all the fine lady sitting in her finery and playing with a divine child.  Yet for saying notwithstanding, ‘Behold the handmaid of the Lord’, she is great, and it seems to me that it should not be difficult to explain why she became the mother of God.  She needs no worldly admiration, as little as Abraham needs our tears, for she was no heroine and he no hero, but both of them became greater than that, not by any means by being relieved of the distress, the agony, and the paradox, but because of these.  Great indeed it is when the poet presents his tragic hero for popular admiration and dares to say: ‘Weep for him, for he deserves it’; for there is greatness in meriting the tears of those who deserve to shed them; great indeed for the poet to dare hold the crowd in check, dare discipline people into testing their own worthiness to weep for the hero, for the waste-water of snivellers is a degradation of the holy.  But greater than all these is that the knight of faith dares to say even to the noble person who would weep for him: ‘Do not weep for me, but weep for yourself.’ One is stirred, one harks back to those beautiful times, sweet tender longings lead one to the goal of one’s desire, to see Christ walking about in the promised land.  One forgets the fear, the distress, the paradox.  Was it so easy a matter not to be mistaken? Was it not a fearful thought that this man who walked among the others was God? Was it not terrifying to sit down to eat with him? Was it so easy a matter to become an apostle? But the outcome, eighteen centuries, that helps; it helps that shabby deception wherein one deceives oneself and others.  I do not feel brave enough to wish to be contemporary with such events, but for that reason I do not judge harshly of those who were mistaken, nor think meanly of those who saw the truth.  But now I return to Abraham.  In the time before the outcome either Abraham was a murderer every minute or we stay with the paradox which is higher than all mediation.  So Abraham’s story contains a teleological suspension of the ethical.  He has, as the single individual, become higher than the universal.  This is the paradox which cannot be mediated.  How he got into it is just as inexplicable as how he stayed in it.  If this is not how it is with Abraham, then he is not even a tragic hero but a murderer.  To want to go on calling him the father of faith, to talk of this to those who are only concerned with words, is thoughtless.  A tragic hero can become a human being by his own strength, but not the knight of faith.  When a person sets out on the tragic hero’s admittedly hard path there are many who could lend him advice; but he who walks the narrow path of faith no one can advise, no one understand.  Faith is a marvel, and yet no human being is excluded from it; for that in which all human life is united is passion, 4 and faith is a passion.  Fear and Trembling Table of Contents Title Page Copyright Page Preface Attunement Speech in Praise of Abraham Problemata Preamble from the Heart Problema I Problema II Problema III Epilogue FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE Fear and Trembling Problema II Is There an Absolute Duty to God? The ethical is the universal and as such, in turn, the divine.  It is therefore correct to say that all duty is ultimately duty to God; but if one cannot say more one says in effect that really I have no duty to God.  The duty becomes duty to God by being referred to God, but I do not enter into relation with God in the duty itself.  Thus it is a duty to love one’s neighbour; it is a duty in so far as it is referred to God; yet it is not God that I come in relation to in the duty but the neighbour I love.  If, in this connection, I then say that it is my duty to love God, I in fact only utter a tautology, in so far as ‘God’ is understood in an altogether abstract sense as the divine: i.e.  the universal, i.e.  duty.  The whole of human existence is in that case entirely self-enclosed, as a sphere, and the ethical is at once the limit and completion.  God becomes an invisible, vanishing point, an impotent thought, and his power is to be found only in the ethical, which fills all existence.  So if it should occur to someone to want to love God in some other sense than that mentioned, he is merely being extravagant and loves a phantom which, if it only had the strength to speak, would say to him: ‘Stay where you belong, I don’t ask for your love.’ If it should occur to someone to want to love God in another way, this love would be suspect, like the love referred to by Rousseau when he talks of a person’s loving the Kaffirs instead of his neighbour.  Now if all this is correct, if there is nothing incommensurable in a human life, but any incommensurability were due only to some chance from which nothing followed so far as existence is looked at in light of the Idea, then Hegel would be right.  But where he is wrong is in talking about faith or in letting Abraham be looked on as its father; for in this latter he has passed sentence both on Abraham and on faith.  In the Hegelian philosophy das Äussere (die Entäusserung) the outer, the externalization is higher than das Innere the inner.  This is often illustrated by an example.  The child is das Innere, the man das Äussere; which is why the child is determined precisely by the outer, and conversely the man as das Äussere by the inner.  Faith, on the contrary, is this paradox, that interiority is higher than exteriority, or to recall again an expression we used above, that the odd number is higher than the even.  In the ethical view of life, then, it is the individual’s task to divest himself of the determinant of interiority and give it an expression in the exterior.  Whenever the individual shrinks from doing so, whenever he wants to stay inside, or slip back into, the inner determinant of feeling, mood, etc., he commits an offence, he is in a state of temptation.  The paradox of faith is this, that there is an interiority that is incommensurable with the exterior, an interiority which, it should be stressed, is not identical with the first that of the child, but is a new interiority.  This must not be overlooked.  Recent philosophy has allowed itself without further ado to substitute the immediate for ‘faith’.  If one does that it is ridiculous to deny that faith has existed through all ages.  Faith in such a case keeps fairly ordinary company, it belongs with feeling, mood, idiosyncrasy, hysteria and the rest.  So far philosophy is right to say one should not stop at that.  But there is nothing to warrant philosophy’s speaking in this manner.  Prior to faith there is a movement of infinity, and only then enters faith, nec opinate unexpectedly, on the strength of the absurd.  This I am very well able to understand, without claiming thereby to have faith.  If faith is no more than what philosophy passes it off as then Socrates himself already went further, much further, rather than the converse, that he didn’t come that far.  He made the movement of infinity intellectually.  His ignorance is the infinite resignation.  That task is in itself a match for human strength, even if people nowadays scorn it; yet it is only when this has been done, only when the individual has exhausted himself in the infinite, that he reaches the point where faith can emerge.  Then faith’s paradox is this, that the single individual is higher than the universal, that the single individual (to recall a theological distinction less in vogue these days) determines his relation to the universal through his relation to the absolute, not his relation to the absolute through his relation to the universal.  The paradox can also be put by saying that there is an absolute duty to God; for in this tie of obligation the individual relates himself absolutely, as the single individual, to the absolute.  When people now say that it is a duty to love God, it is in a sense quite different from the above; for if this duty is absolute the ethical is reduced to the relative.  It doesn’t follow, nevertheless, that the ethical is to be done away with.  Only that it gets a quite different expression, the paradoxical expression, so that, e.g., love of God can cause the knight of faith to give his love of his neighbour the opposite expression to that which is his duty ethically speaking.  Unless this is how it is, faith has no place in existence; and faith is then a temptation, and Abraham is done for, since he gave in to it.  This paradox does not allow of mediation: for it rests precisely on the single individual’s being only the single individual.  As soon as this individual wants to express his absolute duty in the universal, becomes conscious of it in the latter, he knows he is in a state of temptation, and then, even if he otherwise resists the temptation, he does not come to fulfil that so-called absolute duty, and if he does not resist it he sins even if realiter independently of his inclination, wishes, state of mind his act is the one that was his absolute duty.  Thus what could Abraham have done? If he had wanted to say to someone: ‘I love Isaac more than everything in the world, and that’s why it is so hard for me to sacrifice him’, the person would surely have shaken his head and said: ‘Then why sacrifice him?’, or if he was a perceptive fellow perhaps he might even have seen through Abraham, realized that he was betraying feelings which stood in flagrant contradiction with his deed.  In the story of Abraham we find just such a paradox.  Ethically speaking his relation to Isaac is this, that the father is to love the son.  This ethical relationship is reduced to the relative as against the absolute relation to God.  To the question, why?, Abraham has no other answer than that it is a trial and a temptation, which, as remarked above, is what makes it a unity of being for both God’s sake and his own.  These two are also correlative in ordinary usage.  Thus when we see someone do something that doesn’t conform with the universal, we say, ‘He can hardly be doing that for the sake of God’, meaning by this that he did it for his own sake.  The paradox of faith has lost the intermediate term, i.e.  the universal.  On the one hand it contains the expression of extreme egoism (doing this dreadful deed for his own sake) and on the other the expression of the most absolute devotion (doing it for God’s sake).  Faith itself cannot be mediated into the universal, for in that case it would be cancelled.  Faith is this paradox, and the single individual is quite unable to make himself intelligible to anyone.  One might suppose the single individual could make himself understood to another individual who is in the same situation.  Such a view would be unthinkable were it not that nowadays people try in so many ways to sneak their way into greatness.  The one knight of faith simply cannot help the other.  Either the single individual becomes a knight of faith himself by putting on the paradox, or he never becomes one.  Partnership in these regions is quite unthinkable.  If there is any more precise explanation of the idea behind the sacrifice of Isaac, it is one that the individual can only give to himself.  And supposing one could settle, even with some exactitude, in universal terms, how to understand the case of Isaac (which would in any case be the most absurd self-contradiction, namely that the single individual who stands precisely outside the universal be brought in under universal categories, when he is expressly to act as the single individual outside the universal), the individual could still never be assured of the truth of this explanation by others, but only by himself as the single individual.  So even if someone were so cowardly and base as to want to be a knight of faith on someone else’s responsibility, he would never become one; for only the single individual becomes one, as the single individual, and this is the knight’s greatness, as I can well understand without being party to it, since I lack courage; though also his terror, as I can understand even better.  As everyone knows, Luke 14.26 presents a remarkable teaching on the absolute duty to God: ‘If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.’ This is a hard saying, who can bear to hear it? And for that reason it is heard very seldom.  Yet this silence is only a futile evasion.  The student of theology learns, however, that these words occur in the New Testament, and in one or another exegetical aid he finds the information that misein to hate, both here and in some other passages, is used per meiosin by adopting a weaker sense to mean: minus diligo love less, posthabeo give less priority to, non colo show no respect to, nihil facio make nothing of.  The context in which these words occur seems, however, not to corroborate this tasteful explanation.  For in the next verse but one there is a story about someone who plans to erect a tower but first makes some estimate of his capacity to do so, lest he be the object of ridicule later.  The close link between this story and the verse quoted seems to suggest precisely that the words are to be taken in as terrifying a sense as possible in order that everyone should examine his own ability to erect the building.  If this pious and tender-minded exegete, who thinks he can smuggle Christianity into the world by haggling in this way, should succeed in convincing anyone that grammatically, linguistically, and kata analogian by analogy this was the meaning of the passage, then it is to be hoped that in so doing he also manages to convince the same person that Christianity is one of the most miserable things in the world.  For the teaching which in one of its most lyrical outpourings, where the sense of its eternal validity swells up most strongly, has nothing to offer but a sounding phrase that signifies nothing and suggests only that one is to be less kind, less attentive, more indifferent; the teaching which, just as it seems to want to tell us something terrible, ends up in drivel rather than terror — that teaching is certainly not worth standing up for.  The words are terrible, but I feel sure they can be understood without the person who understands them necessarily having the courage to do as they say.  And yet there must be honesty enough to admit what is there, to confess to its greatness even if one lacks the courage oneself.  Anyone who manages that will not exclude himself from a share in the beautiful story, for in a way it contains a kind of comfort for the man who lacks courage to begin building the tower.  But he must be honest and not pass off this lack of courage as humility, since on the contrary it is pride, while the courage of faith is the only humble courage.  One now sees readily that if the passage is to have any sense, it must be understood literally.  It is God who demands absolute love.  Anyone who, in demanding a person’s love, thinks this must be proved by the latter’s becoming lukewarm towards all that was hitherto dear to him, is not simply an egoist but a fool, and anyone demanding such a love would simultaneously sign his own death-warrant in so far as his life is bound up in this love he craves.  A husband requires his wife to leave her father and mother, but were he to regard it as proof of her special love for him that for his sake she became a lukewarm, indolent daughter, etc., then he would be an idiot among idiots.  Had he any notion of what love was, he would want to discover — and should he discover it see in this an assurance that his wife loved him more than any other in the kingdom — that she was perfect in her love as daughter and sister.  So what would be considered a sign of egoism and stupidity in a person, one is supposed with the help of an exegete to regard as a worthy conception of the deity.  But how then hate them? I shall not take up the human love/hate distinction here, not because I have so much against it, since at least it is a passionate distinction, but it is egoistic and so does not fit here.  If I regard the requirement as a paradox, on the other hand, then I understand it, i.e.  understand it in the way one can understand a paradox.  The absolute duty can then lead to what ethics would forbid, but it can by no means make the knight of faith have done with loving.  This is shown by Abraham.  The moment he is ready to sacrifice Isaac, the ethical expression for what he does is this: he hates Isaac.  But if he actually hates Isaac he can be certain that God does not require this of him; for Cain and Abraham are not the same.  Isaac he must love with all his soul.  When God asks for Isaac, Abraham must if possible love him even more, and only then can he sacrifice him; for it is indeed this love of Isaac that in its paradoxical opposition to his love of God makes his act a sacrifice.  But the distress and anguish in the paradox is that, humanly speaking, he is quite incapable of making himself understood.  Only in the moment when his act is in absolute contradiction with his feeling, only then does he sacrifice Isaac, but the reality of his act is that in virtue of which he belongs to the universal, and there he is and remains a murderer.  Furthermore, the passage in Luke must be understood in such a way that one grasps that the knight of faith has no higher expression whatever of the universal (as the ethical) which can save him.  Thus if we imagine the Church were to demand this sacrifice of one of its members, then all we have is a tragic hero.  For qualitatively the idea of the Church is no different from that of the State, inasmuch as the individual can enter it by common mediation, and in so far as the individual has entered the paradox he does not arrive at the idea of the Church; he doesn’t get out of the paradox either, but must find either his blessedness or his damnation inside it.  An ecclesiastical hero expresses the universal in his deed, and no one in the Church, not even his father or mother, etc., will fail to understand him.  But he is not the knight of faith, and has also a different answer from Abraham’s; he doesn’t say it is a trial or a temptation in which he is being tested.  One as a rule refrains from citing texts like the one in Luke.  There is a fear of letting people loose, a fear that the worst will happen once the individual enjoys carrying on like an individual.  Moreover living as the individual is thought to be the easiest thing of all, and it is the universal that people must be coerced into becoming.  I can share neither this fear nor this opinion, and for the same reason.  No person who has learned that to exist as the individual is the most terrifying thing of all will be afraid of saying it is the greatest.  But then he mustn’t say it in a way that makes his words a pitfall for somebody on the loose, but rather in a way that helps that person into the universal, even though his words can make some small allowance for greatness.  The person who dares not mention such passages dares not mention Abraham either, and to think that existing as the individual is an easy enough matter implies a very dubious indirect admission with regard to oneself; for someone who really respects himself and is concerned for his own soul is assured of the fact that a person living under his own supervision in the world at large lives in greater austerity and seclusion than a maiden in her lady’s bower.  That there may be some who need coercion, who if given free rein would riot in selfish pleasure like unbridled beasts, is no doubt true, but one should show precisely by the fact that one knows how to speak with fear and trembling that one is not of their number.  And out of respect for greatness one should indeed speak, lest it be forgotten for fear of the harm which surely won’t arise if one speaks as one who knows it is the great, knows its terrors, and if one doesn’t know these one doesn’t know its greatness either.  Let us then consider more closely the distress and fear in the paradox of faith.  The tragic hero renounces himself in order to express the universal; the knight of faith renounces the universal in order to be the particular.  As mentioned, it all depends on how one is placed.  Someone who believes it is a simple enough matter to be the individual can always be certain that he is not the knight of faith; for stragglers and vagrant geniuses are not men of faith.  Faith’s knight knows on the contrary that it is glorious to belong to the universal.  He knows it is beautiful and benign to be the particular who translates himself into the universal, the one who so to speak makes a clear and elegant edition of himself, as immaculate as possible, and readable for all; he knows it is refreshing to become intelligible to oneself in the universal, so that he understands the universal and everyone who understands him understands the universal through him in turn, and both rejoice in the security of the universal.  He knows it is beautiful to be born as the particular with the universal as his home, his friendly abode, which receives him straightaway with open arms when he wishes to stay there.  But he also knows that higher up there winds a lonely path, narrow and steep; he knows it is terrible to be born in solitude outside the universal, to walk without meeting a single traveller.  He knows very well where he is, and how he is related to men.  Humanly speaking he is insane and cannot make himself understood to anyone.  And yet ‘insane’ is the mildest expression for him.  If he isn’t viewed thus, he is a hypocrite and the higher up the path he climbs, the more dreadful a hypocrite he becomes.  The knight of faith knows it gives inspiration to surrender oneself to the universal, that it takes courage to do so, but also that there is a certain security in it, just because it is for the universal; he knows it is glorious to be understood by every noble mind, and in such a way that even the beholder is thereby ennobled.  This he knows and he feels as though bound, he could wish this was the task he had been set.  Thus surely Abraham must have now and then wished that the task was to love Isaac in a way meet and fitting for a father, as all would understand and as would be remembered for all time; he must have wished his task was to sacrifice Isaac for the universal, so as to inspire fathers to illustrious deeds - and he must have been well nigh horrified by the thought that for him such wishes were merely temptations and must be treated as such; for he knew it was a solitary path he trod, and that he was doing nothing for the universal but only being tested and tried himself.  Or what was it Abraham did for the universal? Let me speak humanly about it, really humanly! It takes him seventy years to get the son of his old age.  What others get soon enough and have long joy of takes him seventy years.  And why? Because he is being tested and tried.  Is that not insanity? But Abraham believed, and only Sarah wavered and got him to take Hagar as his concubine — but for that reason he also had to drive Hagar away.  He gets Isaac and now he is to be tried once again.  He knew it was glorious to express the universal, glorious to live with Isaac.  But this is not the task.  He knew it would have been a kingly deed to sacrifice such a son for the universal, he himself would have found repose in that, and everyone would have ‘reposed’ in their praise of his deed, just as the vowel ‘reposes’ in its quiescent letter; but this is not the task — he is being tried.  That Roman general famous under the name of Cunctator halted the enemy by his delaying tactics, yet what kind of delayer is Abraham by comparison? But he isn’t saving the State.  This is the sum of one hundred and thirty years.  Who can bear it? Should his contemporaries — if they can be called that — not say: ‘There is an eternal procrastinating with Abraham; when he finally gets a son — and that took long enough — he wants to sacrifice him; he must be demented; and if only he could explain why he wanted to do that, but no, it’s always a “trial” ’? Nor could Abraham offer any further explanation, for his life is like a book put under divine seizure and which will never become publici juris public property.  This is what is terrible.  Anyone who doesn’t see this can always be quite certain he is no knight of faith; but anyone who does see it will not deny that the step of even the most tried tragic hero goes like a dance compared with the slow and creeping progress of the knight of faith.  And having seen it and realized he does not have the courage to understand it, he must at least have some idea of the wonderful glory achieved by that knight in becoming God’s confidant, the Lord’s friend, and — to speak really humanly — in addressing God in heaven as ‘Thou’, while even the tragic hero only addresses him in the third person.  The tragic hero is soon finished, his struggle is soon at an end; he makes the infinite movement and is now safe in the universal.  But the knight of faith is kept awake, for he is under constant trial and can turn back in repentance to the universal at any moment, and this possibility can just as well be a temptation as the truth.  Enlightenment as to which is something he can get from no one; otherwise he would be outside the paradox.  The knight of faith has therefore, first and foremost, the passion to concentrate the whole of the ethical that he violates in one single thing; he can be sure that he really loves Isaac with all his soul.  5 If he cannot be that, he is in a state of temptation.  Next, he has the passion to evoke this certainty intact in a twinkling and in as fully valid a way as in the first instance.  If he cannot do this he doesn’t get started, for then he must constantly start again from the beginning.  The tragic hero, too, concentrates in one single thing the ethical that he teleologically violates, but in this thing he has resort to the universal.  The knight of faith has only himself, and it is there the terrible lies.  Most people let their ethical obligations last a day at a time, but then they never reach this passionate concentration, this energetic awareness.  The tragic hero can in a sense be helped by the universal in acquiring these, but the knight of faith is alone about everything.  The tragic hero acts and finds his point of rest in the universal, the knight of faith is kept in constant tension.  Agamemnon gives up his claim to Iphigenia, thereby finds his point of rest in the universal, and now proceeds to give her in sacrifice.  If Agamemnon had not made the movement, if in the decisive moment, instead of a passionate concentration, his soul had been lost in common chatter about his having several daughters, and vielleicht das Ausserordentliche perhaps something extraordinary could happen - then naturally he would not be a hero but a case for charity.  Abraham has the hero’s concentration too, even though in him it is much more difficult since he has no resort at all to the universal, but he makes one movement more through which he concentrates his soul back upon the marvel.  If Abraham hadn’t done that he would only have been an Agamemnon, provided it can be explained how his willingness to sacrifice Isaac can be justified other than by its benefiting the universal.  Whether the individual is now really in a state of temptation or a knight of faith, only the individual can decide.  Still, it is possible on the basis of the paradox to construct certain criteria which even someone not in it can understand.  The true knight of faith is always absolute isolation, the false knight is sectarian.  The latter involves an attempt to leap off the narrow path of the paradox in order to become a tragic hero on the cheap.  The tragic hero expresses the universal and sacrifices himself for it.  The sectarian Master Jackel has instead his private theatre, i.e. several good friends and companions who represent the universal about as well as the public witnesses in The Golden Snuffbox represent justice.  The knight of faith, on the other hand, is the paradox, he is the individual, absolutely nothing but the individual, without connections and complications.  This is the terror that the puny sectarian cannot endure.  Instead of learning from this that he is incapable of greatness and plainly admitting it, something I cannot but approve since it is what I myself do, the poor wretch thinks he will achieve it by joining company with other poor wretches.  But it won’t at all work, no cheating is tolerated in the world of spirit.  A dozen sectarians link arms, they know nothing at all of the lonely temptations in store for the knight of faith and which he dare not shun just because it would be more terrible still were he presumptuously to force his way forward.  The sectarians deafen each other with their clang and clatter, hold dread at bay with their shrieks, and a whooping Sunday-outing like this thinks it is storming heaven, believes it is following the same path as the knight of faith who, in cosmic isolation, hears never a voice but walks alone with his dreadful responsibility.  As for the knight of faith, he is assigned to himself alone, he has the pain of being unable to make himself intelligible to others but feels no vain desire to show others the way.  The pain is the assurance, vain desires are unknown to him, his mind is too serious for that.  The false knight readily betrays himself by this instantly acquired proficiency; he just doesn’t grasp the point that if another individual is to walk the same path he has to be just as much the individual and is therefore in no need of guidance, least of all from one anxious to press his services on others.  Here again, people unable to bear the martyrdom of unintelligibility jump off the path, and choose instead, conveniently enough, the world’s admiration of their proficiency.  The true knight of faith is a witness, never a teacher, and in this lies the deep humanity in him which is more worth than this foolish concern for others’ weal and woe which is honoured under the name of sympathy, but which is really nothing but vanity.  A person who wants only to be a witness confesses thereby that no one, not even the least, needs another person’s sympathy, or is to be put down so another can raise himself up.  But because what he himself won he did not win on the cheap, so neither does he sell it on the cheap; he is not so pitiable as to accept people’s admiration and pay for it with silent contempt; he knows that whatever truly is great is available equally for all.  So either there is an absolute duty to God, and if so then it is the paradox described, that the single individual as the particular is higher than the universal and as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute - or else faith has never existed because it has existed always; or else Abraham is done for; or else one must explain the passage in Luke 14 in the way that tasteful exegete did, and explain the corresponding passages likewise, and similar ones.  Preface, The Myth of Sisyphus PREFACE F OR ME “The Myth of Sisyphus” marks the beginning of an idea which I was to pursue in The Rebel.  It attempts to resolve the problem of suicide, as The Rebel attempts to resolve that of murder, in both cases without the aid of eternal values which, temporarily perhaps, are absent or distorted in contemporary Europe.  The fundamental subject of “The Myth of Sisyphus” is this: it is legitimate and necessary to wonder whether life has a meaning; therefore it is legitimate to meet the problem of suicide face to face.  The answer, underlying and appearing through the paradoxes which cover it, is this: even if one does not believe in God, suicide is not legitimate.  Written fifteen years ago, in 1940, amid the French and European disaster, this book declares that even within the limits of nihilism it is possible to find the means to proceed beyond nihilism.  In all the books I have written since, I have attempted to pursue this direction.  Although “The Myth of Sisyphus” poses mortal problems, it sums itself up for me as a lucid invitation to live and to create, in the very midst of the desert .  A LBERT C AMUS PARIS MARCH 1955 Fear and Trembling Fear and Trembling PENGUIN BOOKS Published by the Penguin Group Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.  Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0745, Auckland, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England This edition published in Penguin Books (UK) 2005 Published in Penguin Books (USA) 2006 Translation copyright © Alastair Hannay, 1985 All rights reserved Reprinted from Fear and Trembling, translated and introduced by Alastair Hannay (Penguin Classics, 1985).  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Kierkegaard, Søren, 1813-1855.  Frygt og bæven.  English Fear and trembling / Søren Kierkegaard; translated by Alastair Hannay.  p.  cm.  — (Penguin great ideas) eISBN : 978-1-101-00714-3 1.  Christianity — Philosophy.  I.  Hannay, Alastair.  II.  Title.  III.  Series.  BR100.K52 2006 498’.9 — dc22 2006043992 Set in Monotype Dante The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.  Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials.  Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.  http://us.penguingroup.com About the Author, The Myth of Sisyphus ALBERT CAMUS The Myth of Sisyphus Albert Camus, son of a working-class family, was born in Algeria in 1913.  He spent the early years of his life in North Africa, where he worked at various jobs—at the weather bureau, an automobile-accessory firm, a shipping company—to help pay for his courses at the University of Algiers.  He then turned to journalism as a career.  His report on the unhappy state of the Muslims of the Kabylie region aroused the Algerian government to action and brought him public notice.  From 1935 to 1938, he ran the Théâtre de l’Équipe, a theatrical company that produced plays by Malraux, Gide, Synge, Dostoevsky, and others.  During World War II, he was one of the leading writers of the French Resistance and editor of Combat , then an important underground newspaper.  Camus was always very active in the theater, and several of his plays have been published and produced.  His books, including The Stranger, The Plague, The Fall, Exile and the Kingdom , and The Rebel , as well as his plays, have assured his preeminent position in modern French letters.  In 1957 Camus was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.  His sudden death on January 4, 1960, cut short the career of one of the most important literary figures of the Western world when he was at the very summit of his powers.  Fear and Trembling 1 In olden days people said, ‘What a shame things in the world don’t go in the way the priest preaches.’ But the time may be coming, not least with the help of philosophy, when we shall be able to say, ‘How fortunate that things in the world don’t go in the way the priest preaches, since at least there’s a little meaning to life, but none in his sermon.’ 2 Of course any other interest whatever in which an individual concentrates the whole of life’s reality can, when it proves unrealizable, give rise to the movement of resignation.  But I have chosen falling in love to illustrate the movements because this interest will no doubt be more readily understood and thus it relieves me of the need to make all the introductory comments which would be of direct interest to only a few.  3 This requires passion.  Every movement of infinity occurs with passion, and no reflection can bring about a movement.  That’s the perpetual leap in life which explains the movement, while mediation is a chimera which in Hegel is supposed to explain everything and besides is the only thing he has never tried to explain.  Passion is needed even to make the familiar Socratic distinction between what one does and what one doesn’t understand; naturally even more so in making the genuinely Socratic movement, that of ignorance.  What we lack today is not reflection but passion.  For that reason our age is really in a sense too tenacious of life to die, for dying is one of the most remarkable leaps, and a small verse has always greatly attracted me, because having wished himself all the good and simple things in life in five or six lines previously, the poet ends thus: ‘ein seliger Sprung in die Ewigkeit’ a blessed leap into eternity.  4 Lessing has somewhere made similar remarks from a purely aesthetic point of view.  In the passage in question he actually wants to show that sorrow too can express itself with wit.  To that end he quotes the words spoken on a particular occasion by the unfortunate English king, Edward II.  As contrast he quotes from Diderot: a story of a farmer’s wife and a remark of hers, and then continues: ‘That too was wit, and the wit of a peasant at that: but the situation made it inevitable.  Consequently one mustn’t try to find the excuse for the witty expression of pain and of sorrow in the fact that the person who uttered them was superior, well-educated, intelligent, and witty as well, for the passions make all men again equal ...  the explanation lies in the fact that in the same situation probably everyone would have said the same thing.  The peasant woman’s thought is one a queen might just as well have had, just as what the king said on that occasion could, and no doubt would, have been said by a peasant.’ 5 I will explain once more the difference in the collision as between the tragic hero and the knight of faith.  The tragic hero assures himself that the ethical obligation to his son, daughter, etc. is totally present in him by virtue of the fact that he transforms it into a wish.  Thus Agamemnon can say: this is my proof that I am not violating my paternal obligation, that my duty to Iphigenia is my only wish.  Here, then, wish and duty match one another.  Happy my lot in life if my wish coincides with my duty, and conversely; and most people’s task in life is exactly to stay under their obligation, and by their enthusiasm to transform it into their wish.  The tragic hero renounces what he wishes in order to accomplish his duty.  For the knight of faith, wish and duty are also identical, but the knight of faith is required to give up both.  So when renouncing in resignation what he wishes he finds no repose; for it is after all his duty that he is giving up.  If he stays under his obligation and keeps his wish he will not become the knight of faith; for the absolute duty requires precisely that he give up the duty that is identical with the wish.  The tragic hero acquires a higher expression of duty, but not an absolute duty.  6 These movements and attitudes could also be handled aesthetically.  But I leave it open how far faith and the life of belief in general can be handled in that way.  I will only - since I always like to thank those to whom I owe something - express my gratitude to Lessing for the few hints of a Christian drama to be found in his Hamburgische Dramaturgie.  But he has focused on the purely divine side of that life (the consummated victory), and has therefore despaired.  Perhaps if he had paid more attention to the human side he would have come to a different conclusion.  ( Theologia viatorum wayfarer’s theology.) What he says is undeniably very brief, partly evasive, but as I am always very glad of the chance of Lessing’s company I seize on it immediately.  Lessing was not just one of the most erudite minds Germany has produced; he was not just unusually exact in his learning, so that one can safely rely on him and his autopsy without fear of being tricked by inaccurate and concocted quotations, half-understood phrases taken from unreliable compendia, or of being put off-balance by a foolish advertising of novelties that the ancients have stated far better; he had in addition a most unusual gift for explaining what he himself had understood.  There he stopped.  Nowadays one goes further and explains more than one has understood.  7 According to Aristotle the course of the catastrophe is as follows.  In order to avenge itself, the bride’s family plants a vase from the temple among the bridegroom’s household belongings and he is condemned as a temple-robber.  But this is immaterial, for the question is not whether the family is clever or stupid in the manner of its taking revenge; the family is of only theoretical interest in as much as it impinges on the dialectic of the hero.  Besides, there is fatefulness enough in the fact that, though intending to avoid the danger by not marrying, he plunges right into it, together with the fact that his life comes into twofold contact with the divine, first in the utterance of the augur and second by his being condemned as a temple-robber.  8 Here one might trace the dialectic movements in a different direction.  Heaven predicts a personal misfortune due to the marriage, so he could just as well give up the marriage yet needn’t give up the girl on that account, but live in a romantic relationship with her which was more than satisfactory for the lovers.  This, however, amounts to insulting the girl, for in his love for her he doesn’t express the universal, and it was the task both of the poet and of the ethicist to defend marriage.  On the whole, were poetry to attend to the religious aspect and to the inner feeling of its characters, it would command themes of much greater importance than those it now occupies itself with.  Here is the story poetry is repeatedly giving us: a man is stuck with a girl he once loved, or maybe never really loved because he has now seen another who is the ideal.  A man makes mistakes in life, it was the right street but the wrong house, for on the second floor just over the way lives the ideal — that’s what people consider the proper subject of poetry.  A lover makes a mistake, he saw his loved one by candlelight and thought she had dark hair, but look!, on closer inspection she was blonde - however, the sister, there’s the ideal.  That’s what people think poetry is about.  In my view any such man is an impudent fool who can be unbearable enough in life but should be instantly booed off the stage when he tries to put on airs in poetry.  Only the clash of passion against passion provides a poetic collision, not this rummaging about in the particulars of the same passion.  In the Middle Ages, for example, when a girl has fallen in love and then been convinced that earthly love is a sin and prefers a heavenly love, here we have a poetic collision; and the girl too is poetic, for her life is in the idea.  9 There is still another way of treating this legend.  The merman does not want to seduce Agnete, even though he has seduced many previously.  He is no longer a merman, or is if you will a pitiable merman who has now already for some time been sitting sorrowfully on the sea-bed.  However, he knows (as indeed the legend has it) that he can be saved by an innocent girl’s love.  But he has a bad conscience about girls and dare not approach them.  Then he sees Agnete.  Already, many times, as he lay hidden in the reeds, he has seen her walking along the shore.  Her beauty, her quiet self-possession captivate him; but his soul is filled with sadness, no wild desire rages there.  And when the merman blends his sigh with the whispering of the reeds she turns her ear towards it.  Then she stands still and falls into reverie, more delectable than any woman and yet beautiful as an angel of deliverance, who inspired the merman with confidence.  The merman plucks up courage, he approaches Agnete, he wins her love, he hopes for his deliverance.  But Agnete was no quiet girl, she was in fact very taken with the roaring of the ocean and what pleased her about the sad sighing by the sea was that it made the roar in her breast grow stronger.  She would be off and away, rush wildly out into the infinite with the merman, whom she loves - so she eggs the merman on.  She scorned his humility and now the pride reawakens.  10 Aesthetics sometimes treats a similar theme with its usual captiousness.  The merman is saved through Agnete and all ends in a happy marriage.  A happy marriage! Very handy, to be sure.  On the other hand if ethics is to give the wedding speech I imagine things would go differently.  Aesthetics throws the cloak of love over the merman and so everything is forgotten.  It is also rash enough to suppose that things happen at a wedding as they do at an auction, where everything is sold in the condition it is in when it comes under the hammer.  All it cares for is that the lovers get one another, the rest is of no concern.  If only it could see what happens afterwards! But it hasn’t time for that, straightaway it is in full swing again snapping together another couple.  Aesthetics is the most faithless of all sciences.  Anyone who has truly loved it will in a way become unhappy; while anyone who has never done so is and will remain a pecus ox, or blockhead.  11 Up to this point I have carefully avoided all consideration of the question of sin and its reality.  Everything has been centred on Abraham, and he can still be reached with the categories of immediacy, at least so far as I can understand him.  But once sin makes its appearance ethics comes to grief precisely on the question of repentance.  Repentance is the highest ethical expression but for that very reason the most profound ethical self-contradiction.  12 This is not credited in our serious age, and yet remarkably enough even in the typically flightier and less consistently reflective age of paganism the two representatives of the Greek gnothi sauton know thyself way of thought have, each in his own manner, intimated that if one probes one’s own depths what one uncovers is first and foremost the disposition to evil.  I need hardly remark that I am thinking of Pythagoras and Socrates.  13 If one would rather not use a doubter, a similar figure would do.  An ironist, for example, whose sharp eye has taken radical measure of the ludicrousness of life, who through a secret understanding with the forces of life ascertains what the patient needs.  He knows he commands the power of laughter; should he wish to wield it he would be sure of victory and, what is even better, of his happiness.  He knows some voice is going to raise itself against him, but also that he himself is the stronger; he knows people can still be brought for a moment to appear serious - but also that, privately, they long to laugh with him; he knows that it is still possible to bring a woman for a moment to hold up her fan before her eyes when she speaks, but he also knows that behind the fan she is laughing, he knows the fan is not completely opaque, he knows one can make invisible inscriptions on it, he knows that when a woman strikes at him with the fan it is because she has understood him, he knows infallibly how laughter creeps into a person and dwells there secretly, and how once lodged there it lies in ambush and waits.  Let us suppose such an Aristophanes, such a Voltaire, slightly altered, for he is also of a sympathetic nature, he loves life, loves people, and knows that even if a young, saved generation might benefit from the rebuke of laughter, in his own age for many it would mean rack and ruin.  So he keeps silent and as far as possible forgets to laugh himself.  But does he dare keep silent? Perhaps many will fail to see the difficulty I am referring to.  They will probably consider it admirably high-minded of him to keep silent.  That is not at all what I think.  I believe that if any such person has not the magnanimity to keep silent he is a traitor to life.  So I require this magnanimity of him.  But if he has it he dares to keep silent.  Ethics is a dangerous science and it may well have been out of purely ethical considerations that Aristophanes decided to let laughter pass judgement on his misguided age.  Aesthetic magnanimity cannot help.  Its account has no credit column for the taking of such risks.  If he is silent he must enter the paradox.  - Still another scenario: suppose, for example, someone is in possession of an explanation of a public hero’s life, but one that explains it in a deplorable light, and yet a whole generation rests secure in this hero and has no suspicion of anything of the sort.  14 Which of Socrates’s remarks is to be regarded as the decisive one can be a matter of controversy, since Socrates has been in so many ways poetically volatilized by Plato.  I suggest the following: the death-sentence is announced to him, that instant he dies and fulfils himself in the famous rejoinder that he was surprised to have been condemned with a majority of three votes.  He could have found no more ironic jest in some market-place flippancy or fool’s inanity than in this comment on the death-sentence which condemns him from life itself.  15 In so far as there is any question of an analogy here, the circumstances of the death of Pythagoras provide one.  In his last moments Pythagoras had to consummate the silence he had always maintained, and so he said, ‘It’s better to be killed than to speak.’ cf.  Diogenes, 8th Bk.  § 39.  16 ‘Chai potamou roi apeikadzon ta onta legei hos dis es ton auton potamon ouk embaiis.’ cf.  Plato’s Cratyllus §402, Ast.  3rd B.  Pag.  158.  †cf.  Tennemann Gesch .  d .  Philos.  Ister B.  Pag.  220.  Continued, The Myth of Sisyphus ALSO BY A LBERT C AMUS EXILE AND THE KINGDOM From a variety of masterfully rendered perspectives, these six stories depict people at painful odds with the world around them.  A wife can only surrender to a desert night by betraying her husband.  An artist struggles to honor his own aspirations as well as society’s expectations of him.  A missionary brutally converted to the worship of a tribal fetish is left with but an echo of his identity.  Whether set in North Africa, Paris, or Brazil, the stories in Exile and the Kingdom are probing portraits of spiritual exile and man’s perpetual search for an inner kingdom in which to be reborn.  They display Camus at the height of his powers.  Fiction RESISTANCE, REBELLION, AND DEATH Essays In the speech he gave upon accepting the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1957, Albert Camus said that a writer “cannot serve today those who make history; he must serve those who are subject to it.” And in these twenty-three political essays, he demonstrates his commitment to history’s victims, from the fallen maquis of the French Resistance to the casualties of the Cold War.  Resistance, Rebellion and Death displays Camus’s rigorous moral intelligence, addressing issues that range from colonial warfare in Algeria to the social cancer of capital punishment.  But this stirring book is, above all, a reflection on the problem of freedom, and, as such, belongs in the same tradition as the works that gave Camus his reputation as the conscience of our century: The Stranger, The Rebel , and The Myth of Sisyphus .  Nonfiction THE STRANGER Since it was first published in English in 1946, Albert Camus’s first novel, The Stranger , has had a profound impact on millions of readers.  Through this story of an ordinary man who unwittingly gets drawn into a senseless murder on a sundrenched Algerian beach, Camus explored what he termed “the nakedness of man faced with the absurd.” Now, in an illuminating American translation, extraordinary for its exactitude and clarity, the original intent of The Stranger is made more immediate.  This haunting novel has been given a new life for generations to come.  Fiction A HAPPY DEATH In his first novel, A Happy Death , written when he was in his early twenties and retrieved from his private papers following his death in 1960, Albert Camus laid the foundation for the The Stranger , focusing in both works on an Algerian clerk who kills a man in cold blood.  But he also revealed himself to an extent that he never did in his later fiction.  For if A Happy Death is the study of a rule-bound being shattering the fetters of his existence, it is also a remarkably candid portrait of its author as a young man.  As the novel follows the protagonist, Patrice Mersault, to his victim’s house—and then, fleeing, on a journey that takes him through stages of exile, hedonism, privation, and death—it gives us a glimpse into the imagination of one of the great writers of the twentieth century.  For here is the young Camus himself, in love with the sea and sun, enraptured by women yet disdainful of romantic love, and already formulating the philosophy of action and moral responsibility that would make him central to the thought of our time.  Fiction THE REBEL An Essay on Man in Revolt For Albert Camus, the urge to revolt is one of the “essential dimensions” of human nature, manifested in man’s timeless Promethean struggle against the conditions of his existence, as well as the popular uprisings against established orders throughout history.  And yet, with an eye toward the French Revolution and its regicides and deicides, he shows how inevitably the course of revolution leads to tyranny.  As old regimes throughout the world collapse, The Rebel resonates as an ardent, eloquent, and supremely rational voice of conscience for our tumultuous times.  Nonfiction THE FIRST MAN Jacques Cormery is a boy who lived a life much like Camus’s own.  Camus summons up the sights, sounds and textures of a childhood circumscribed by poverty, a father’s death yet redeemed by the austere beauty of Algeria, and the boy’s attachment to his nearly deaf-mute mother.  Published thirty-five years after its discovery amid the wreckage of the car accident that killed Camus, The First Man is the brilliant consummation of the life and work of this great novelist.  Fiction THE PLAGUE A gripping tale of unrelieved horror, of survival and resilience, and of the ways in which humankind confronts death, The Plague is at once a masterfully crafted novel, eloquently understated and epic in scope, and a parable of ageless moral resonance profoundly relevant to our times.  In Oran, a coastal town in North Africa, the plague begins as a series of portents, unheeded by the people.  It gradually becomes an omnipresent reality, obliterating all traces of the past and driving its victims to almost unearthly extremes of suffering, madness, and compassion.  Fiction THE FALL Mordant, brilliant, elegantly styled, The Fall is a novel of the conscience of modern man in the face of evil.  In a seedy bar in Amsterdam, Clamence, an expatriate Frenchman, indulges in a calculated confession.  He recalls his past life as a respected Parisian lawyer, a champion of noble causes, and, privately, a libertine—yet one apparently immune to judgment.  As his narrative unfolds, ambiguities amass; every triump reveals a failure, every motive a hidden treachery.  The irony of his recital anticipates his downfall—and implicates us all.  Fiction ALSO AVAILABLE Caligula and Three Other Plays Lyrical and Critical Essays VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL Available wherever books are sold.  www.vintagebooks.com Fear and Trembling FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE In every corner of the world, on every subject under the sun, Penguin represents quality and variety — the very best in publishing today.  For complete information about books available from Penguin — including Penguin Classics, Penguin Compass, and Puffins — and how to order them, write to us at the appropriate address below.  Please note that for copyright reasons the selection of books varies from country to country.  In the United States: Please write to Penguin Group (USA), P.O.  Box 12289 Dept.  B, Newark, Mew Jersey 07101-5289 or call 1-800-788-6262.  In the United Kingdom: Please write to Dept.  EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Bath Road, Harmondsworth, West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 ODA.  In Canada: Please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3.  In Australia: Please write to Penguin Books Australia Ltd, P.O.  Box 257, Ringwond, Victoria 3134.  In New Zealand: Please write to Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Private Bag 102902, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10.  In India: Please write to Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Panchsheel Shopping Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017.  In the Netherlands: Please write to Penguin Books Netherlands bv, Postbus 3507, NL-1001 AH Amsterdam.  In Germany: Please write to Penguin Books Deutschland GmbH, Metzlerstrasse 26, 60594 Frankfurt am Main.  In Spain: Please write to Penguin Books S.  A., Bravo Murillo 19, 1° B, 28015 Madrid.  In Italy: Please write to Penguin Italia s.r.l.  , Via Benedetto Croce 2, 20094 Corsico, Milano.  In France: Please write to Penguin France, Le Carré Wilson, 62 rue Benjamin Baillaud, 31500 Toulouse.  In Japan: Please write to Penguin Books Japan Ltd, Kaneko Building, 2-3-25 Koraku, Bunkyo-Ku,Tokyo 112.  In South Africa: Please write to Penguin Books South Africa (Pty) Ltd, Private Bag X14 , Parkview, 2122 Johannesburg.  Appendix: Hope and the Absurd in the Work of Franz Kafka, The Myth of Sisyphus APPENDIX: Hope and the Absurd in the Work of Franz Kafka T HE WHOLE ART of Kafka consists in forcing the reader to reread.  His endings, or his absence of endings, suggest explanations which, however, are not revealed in clear language but, before they seem justified, require that the story be reread from another point of view.  Sometimes there is a double possibility of interpretation, whence appears the necessity for two readings.  This is what the author wanted.  But it would be wrong to try to interpret everything in Kafka in detail.  A symbol is always in general and, however precise its translation, an artist can restore to it only its movement: there is no word-for-word rendering.  Moreover, nothing is harder to understand than a symbolic work.  A symbol always transcends the one who makes use of it and makes him say in reality more than he is aware of expressing.  In this regard, the surest means of getting hold of it is not to provoke it, to begin the work without a preconceived attitude and not to look for its hidden currents.  For Kafka in particular it is fair to agree to his rules, to approach the drama through its externals and the novel through its form.  At first glance and for a casual reader, they are disturbing adventures that carry off quaking and dogged characters into pursuit of problems they never formulate.  In The Trial , Joseph K.  is accused.  But he doesn’t know of what.  He is doubtless eager to defend himself, but he doesn’t know why.  The lawyers find his case difficult.  Meanwhile, he does not neglect to love, to eat, or to read his paper.  Then he is judged.  But the courtroom is very dark.  He doesn’t understand much.  He merely assumes that he is condemned, but to what he barely wonders.  At times he suspects just the same, and he continues living.  Some time later two well-dressed and polite gentlemen come to get him and invite him to follow them.  Most courteously they lead him into a wretched suburb, put his head on a stone, and slit his throat.  Before dying the condemned man says merely: “Like a dog.” You see that it is hard to speak of a symbol in a tale whose most obvious quality just happens to be naturalness.  But naturalness is a hard category to understand.  There are works in which the event seems natural to the reader.  But there are others (rarer, to be sure) in which the character considers natural what happens to him.  By an odd but obvious paradox, the more extraordinary the character’s adventures are, the more noticeable will be the naturalness of the story: it is in proportion to the divergence we feel between the strangeness of a man’s life and the simplicity with which that man accepts it.  It seems that this naturalness is Kafka’s.  And, precisely, one is well aware what The Trial means.  People have spoken of an image of the human condition.  To be sure.  Yet it is both simpler and more complex.  I mean that the significance of the novel is more particular and more personal to Kafka.  To a certain degree, he is the one who does the talking, even though it is me he confesses.  He lives and he is condemned.  He learns this on the first pages of the novel he is pursuing in this world, and if he tries to cope with this, he nonetheless does so without surprise.  He will never show sufficient astonishment at this lack of astonishment.  It is by such contradictions that the first signs of the absurd work are recognized.  The mind projects into the concrete its spiritual tragedy.  And it can do so solely by means of a perpetual paradox which confers on colors the power to express the void and on daily gestures the strength to translate eternal ambitions.  Likewise, The Castle is perhaps a theology in action, but it is first of all the individual adventure of a soul in quest of its grace, of a man who asks of this world’s objects their royal secret and of women the signs of the god that sleeps in them.  Metamorphosis , in turn, certainly represents the horrible imagery of an ethic of lucidity.  But it is also the product of that incalculable amazement man feels at being conscious of the beast he becomes effortlessly.  In this fundamental ambiguity lies Kafka’s secret.  These perpetual oscillations between the natural and the extraordinary, the individual and the universal, the tragic and the everyday, the absurd and the logical, are found throughout his work and give it both its resonance and its meaning.  These are the paradoxes that must be enumerated, the contradictions that must be strengthened, in order to understand the absurd work.  A symbol, indeed, assumes two planes, two worlds of ideas and sensations, and a dictionary of correspondences between them.  This lexicon is the hardest thing to draw up.  But awaking to the two worlds brought face to face is tantamount to getting on the trail of their secret relationships.  In Kafka these two worlds are that of everyday life on the one hand and, on the other, that of supernatural anxiety.  *1 It seems that we are witnessing here an interminable exploitation of Nietzsche’s remark: “Great problems are in the street.” There is in the human condition (and this is a commonplace of all literatures) a basic absurdity as well as an implacable nobility.  The two coincide, as is natural.  Both of them are represented, let me repeat, in the ridiculous divorce separating our spiritual excesses and the ephemeral joys of the body.  The absurd thing is that it should be the soul of this body which it transcends so inordinately.  Whoever would like to represent this absurdity must give it life in a series of parallel contrasts.  Thus it is that Kafka expresses tragedy by the everyday and the absurd by the logical.  An actor lends more force to a tragic character the more careful he is not to exaggerate it.  If he is moderate, the horror he inspires will be immoderate.  In this regard Greek tragedy is rich in lessons.  In a tragic work fate always makes itself felt better in the guise of logic and naturalness.  Œdipus’s fate is announced in advance.  It is decided supernaturally that he will commit the murder and the incest.  The drama’s whole effort is to show the logical system which, from deduction to deduction, will crown the hero’s misfortune.  Merely to announce to us that uncommon fate is scarcely horrible, because it is improbable.  But if its necessity is demonstrated to us in the framework of everyday life, society, state, familiar emotion, then the horror is hallowed.  In that revolt that shakes man and makes him say: “That is not possible,” there is an element of desperate certainty that “that” can be.  This is the whole secret of Greek tragedy, or at least of one of its aspects.  For there is another which, by a reverse method, would help us to understand Kafka better.  The human heart has a tiresome tendency to label as fate only what crushes it.  But happiness likewise, in its way, is without reason, since it is inevitable.  Modern man, however, takes the credit for it himself, when he doesn’t fail to recognize it.  Much could be said, on the contrary, about the privileged fates of Greek tragedy and those favored in legend who, like Ulysses, in the midst of the worst adventures are saved from themselves.  It was not so easy to return to Ithaca.  What must be remembered in any case is that secret complicity that joins the logical and the everyday to the tragic.  This is why Samsa, the hero of Metamorphosis , is a traveling salesman.  This is why the only thing that disturbs him in the strange adventure that makes a vermin of him is that his boss will be angry at his absence.  Legs and feelers grow out on him, his spine arches up, white spots appear on his belly and—I shall not say that this does not astonish him, for the effect would be spoiled—but it causes him a “slight annoyance.” The whole art of Kafka is in that distinction.  In his central work, The Castle , the details of everyday life stand out, and yet in that strange novel in which nothing concludes and everything begins over again, it is the essential adventure of a soul in quest of its grace that is represented.  That translation of the problem into action, that coincidence of the general and the particular are recognized likewise in the little artifices that belong to every great creator.  In The Trial the hero might have been named Schmidt or Franz Kafka.  But he is named Joseph K.  He is not Kafka and yet he is Kafka.  He is an average European.  He is like everybody else.  But he is also the entity K.  who is the x of this flesh-and-blood equation.  Likewise, if Kafka wants to express the absurd, he will make use of consistency.  You know the story of the crazy man who was fishing in a bathtub.  A doctor with ideas as to psychiatric treatments asked him “if they were biting,” to which he received the harsh reply: “Of course not, you fool, since this is a bathtub.” That story belongs to the baroque type.  But in it can be grasped quite clearly to what a degree the absurd effect is linked to an excess of logic.  Kafka’s world is in truth an indescribable universe in which man allows himself the tormenting luxury of fishing in a bathtub, knowing that nothing will come of it.  Consequently, I recognize here a work that is absurd in its principles.  As for The Trial , for instance, I can indeed say that it is a complete success.  Flesh wins out.  Nothing is lacking, neither the unexpressed revolt (but it is what is writing), nor lucid and mute despair (but it is what is creating), nor that amazing freedom of manner which the characters of the novel exemplify until their ultimate death.  * * * Yet this world is not so closed as it seems.  Into this universe devoid of progress, Kafka is going to introduce hope in a strange form.  In this regard The Trial and The Castle do not follow the same direction.  They complement each other.  The barely perceptible progression from one to the other represents a tremendous conquest in the realm of evasion.  The Trial propounds a problem which The Castle , to a certain degree, solves.  The first describes according to a quasi-scientific method and without concluding.  The second, to a certain degree, explains.  The Trial diagnoses, and The Castle imagines a treatment.  But the remedy proposed here does not cure.  It merely brings the malady back into normal life.  It helps to accept it.  In a certain sense (let us think of Kierkegaard), it makes people cherish it.  The Land Surveyor K.  cannot imagine another anxiety than the one that is tormenting him.  The very people around him become attached to that void and that nameless pain, as if suffering assumed in this case a privileged aspect.  “How I need you,” Frieda says to K.  “How forsaken I feel, since knowing you, when you are not with me.” This subtle remedy that makes us love what crushes us and makes hope spring up in a world without issue, this sudden “leap” through which everything is changed, is the secret of the existential revolution and of The Castle itself.  Few works are more rigorous in their development than The Castle .  K.  is named Land Surveyor to the Castle and he arrives in the village.  But from the village to the Castle it is impossible to communicate.  For hundreds of pages K.  persists in seeking his way, makes every advance, uses trickery and expedients, never gets angry, and with disconcerting good will tries to assume the duties entrusted to him.  Each chapter is a new frustration.  And also a new beginning.  It is not logic, but consistent method.  The scope of that insistence constitutes the work’s tragic quality.  When K.  telephones to the Castle, he hears confused, mingled voices, vague laughs, distant invitations.  That is enough to feed his hope, like those few signs appearing in summer skies or those evening anticipations which make up our reason for living.  Here is found the secret of the melancholy peculiar to Kafka.  The same, in truth, that is found in Proust’s work or in the landscape of Plotinus: a nostalgia for a lost paradise.  “I become very sad,” says Olga, “when Barnabas tells me in the morning that he is going to the Castle: that probably futile trip, that probably wasted day, that probably empty hope.” “Probably”—on this implication Kafka gambles his entire work.  But nothing avails; the quest of the eternal here is meticulous.  And those inspired automata, Kafka’s characters, provide us with a precise image of what we should be if we were deprived of our distractions *2 and utterly consigned to the humiliations of the divine.  In The Castle that surrender to the everyday becomes an ethic.  The great hope of K.  is to get the Castle to adopt him.  Unable to achieve this alone, his whole effort is to deserve this favor by becoming an inhabitant of the village, by losing the status of foreigner that everyone makes him feel.  What he wants is an occupation, a home, the life of a healthy, normal man.  He can’t stand his madness any longer.  He wants to be reasonable.  He wants to cast off the peculiar curse that makes him a stranger to the village.  The episode of Frieda is significant in this regard.  If he takes as his mistress this woman who has known one of the Castle’s officials, this is because of her past.  He derives from her something that transcends him—while being aware of what makes her forever unworthy of the Castle.  This makes one think of Kierkegaard’s strange love for Regina Olsen.  In certain men, the fire of eternity consuming them is great enough for them to burn in it the very heart of those closest to them.  The fatal mistake that consists in giving to God what is not God’s is likewise the subject of this episode of The Castle .  But for Kafka it seems that this is not a mistake.  It is a doctrine and a “leap.” There is nothing that is not God’s.  Even more significant is the fact that the Land Surveyor breaks with Frieda in order to go toward the Barnabas sisters.  For the Barnabas family is the only one in the village that is utterly forsaken by the Castle and by the village itself.  Amalia, the elder sister, has rejected the shameful propositions made her by one of the Castle’s officials.  The immoral curse that followed has forever cast her out from the love of God.  Being incapable of losing one’s honor for God amounts to making oneself unworthy of his grace.  You recognize a theme familiar to existential philosophy: truth contrary to morality.  At this point things are far-reaching.  For the path pursued by Kafka’s hero from Frieda to the Barnabas sisters is the very one that leads from trusting love to the deification of the absurd.  Here again Kafka’s thought runs parallel to Kierkegaard.  It is not surprising that the “Barnabas story” is placed at the end of the book.  The Land Surveyor’s last attempt is to recapture God through what negates him, to recognize him, not according to our categories of goodness and beauty, but behind the empty and hideous aspects of his indifference, of his injustice, and of his hatred.  That stranger who asks the Castle to adopt him is at the end of his voyage a little more exiled because this time he is unfaithful to himself, forsaking morality, logic, and intellectual truths in order to try to enter, endowed solely with his mad hope, the desert of divine grace.  *3 * * * The word “hope” used here is not ridiculous.  On the contrary, the more tragic the condition described by Kafka, the firmer and more aggressive that hope becomes.  The more truly absurd The Trial is, the more moving and illegitimate the impassioned “leap” of The Castle seems.  But we find here again in a pure state the paradox of existential thought as it is expressed, for instance, by Kierkegaard: “Earthly hope must be killed; only then can one be saved by true hope,” *4 which can be translated: “One has to have written The Trial to undertake The Castle .” Most of those who have spoken of Kafka have indeed defined his work as a desperate cry with no recourse left to man.  But this calls for review.  There is hope and hope.  To me the optimistic work of Henri Bordeaux seems peculiarly discouraging.  This is because it has nothing for the discriminating.  Malraux’s thought, on the other hand, is always bracing.  But in these two cases neither the same hope nor the same despair is at issue.  I see merely that the absurd work itself may lead to the infidelity I want to avoid.  The work which was but an ineffectual repetition of a sterile condition, a lucid glorification of the ephemeral, becomes here a cradle of illusions.  It explains, it gives a shape to hope.  The creator can no longer divorce himself from it.  It is not the tragic game it was to be.  It gives a meaning to the author’s life.  It is strange in any case that works of related inspiration like those of Kafka, Kierkegaard, or Chestov—those, in short, of existential novelists and philosophers completely oriented toward the Absurd and its consequences—should in the long run lead to that tremendous cry of hope.  They embrace the God that consumes them.  It is through humility that hope enters in.  For the absurd of this existence assures them a little more of supernatural reality.  If the course of this life leads to God, there is an outcome after all.  And the perseverance, the insistence with which Kierkegaard, Chestov, and Kafka’s heroes repeat their itineraries are a special warrant of the uplifting power of that certainty.  *5 Kafka refuses his god moral nobility, evidence, virtue, coherence, but only the better to fall into his arms.  The absurd is recognized, accepted, and man is resigned to it, but from then on we know that it has ceased to be the absurd.  Within the limits of the human condition, what greater hope than the hope that allows an escape from that condition? As I see once more, existential thought in this regard (and contrary to current opinion) is steeped in a vast hope.  The very hope which at the time of early Christianity and the spreading of the good news inflamed the ancient world.  But in that leap that characterizes all existential thought, in that insistence, in that surveying of a divinity devoid of surface, how can one fail to see the mark of a lucidity that repudiates itself? It is merely claimed that this is pride abdicating to save itself.  Such a repudiation would be fecund.  But this does not change that.  The moral value of lucidity cannot be diminished in my eyes by calling it sterile like all pride.  For a truth also, by its very definition, is sterile.  All facts are.  In a world where everything is given and nothing is explained, the fecundity of a value or of a metaphysic is a notion devoid of meaning.  In any case, you see here in what tradition of thought Kafka’s work takes its place.  It would indeed be intelligent to consider as inevitable the progression leading from The Trial to The Castle .  Joseph K.  and the Land Surveyor K.  are merely two poles that attract Kafka.  *6 I shall speak like him and say that his work is probably not absurd.  But that should not deter us from seeing its nobility and universality.  They come from the fact that he managed to represent so fully the everyday passage from hope to grief and from desperate wisdom to intentional blindness.  His work is universal (a really absurd work is not universal) to the extent to which it represents the emotionally moving face of man fleeing humanity, deriving from his contradictions reasons for believing, reasons for hoping from his fecund despairs, and calling life his terrifying apprenticeship in death.  It is universal because its inspiration is religious.  As in all religions, man is freed of the weight of his own life.  But if I know that, if I can even admire it, I also know that I am not seeking what is universal, but what is true.  The two may well not coincide.  This particular view will be better understood if I say that truly hopeless thought just happens to be defined by the opposite criteria and that the tragic work might be the work that, after all future hope is exiled, describes the life of a happy man.  The more exciting life is, the more absurd is the idea of losing it.  This is perhaps the secret of that proud aridity felt in Nietzsche’s work.  In this connection, Nietzsche appears to be the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an æsthetic of the Absurd, inasmuch as his final message lies in a sterile and conquering lucidity and an obstinate negation of any supernatural consolation.  The preceding should nevertheless suffice to bring out the capital importance of Kafka in the framework of this essay.  Here we are carried to the confines of human thought.  In the fullest sense of the word, it can be said that everything in that work is essential.  In any case, it propounds the absurd problem altogether.  If one wants to compare these conclusions with our initial remarks, the content with the form, the secret meaning of The Castle with the natural art in which it is molded, K.’s passionate, proud quest with the everyday setting against which it takes place, then one will realize what may be its greatness.  For if nostalgia is the mark of the human, perhaps no one has given such flesh and volume to these phantoms of regret.  But at the same time will be sensed what exceptional nobility the absurd work calls for, which is perhaps not found here.  If the nature of art is to bind the general to the particular, ephemeral eternity of a drop of water to the play of its lights, it is even truer to judge the greatness of the absurd writer by the distance he is able to introduce between these two worlds.  His secret consists in being able to find the exact point where they meet in their greatest disproportion.  And, to tell the truth, this geometrical locus of man and the inhuman is seen everywhere by the pure in heart.  If Faust and Don Quixote are eminent creations of art, this is because of the immeasurable nobilities they point out to us with their earthly hands.  Yet a moment always comes when the mind negates the truths that those hands can touch.  A moment comes when the creation ceases to be taken tragically; it is merely taken seriously.  Then man is concerned with hope.  But that is not his business.  His business is to turn away from subterfuge.  Yet this is just what I find at the conclusion of the vehement proceedings Kafka institutes against the whole universe.  His unbelievable verdict is this hideous and upsetting world in which the very moles dare to hope.  *7 *1 It is worth noting that the works of Kafka can quite as legitimately be interpreted in the sense of a social criticism (for instance in The Trial ).  It is probable, moreover, that there is no need to choose.  Both interpretations are good.  In absurd terms, as we have seen, revolt against men is also directed against God: great revolutions are always metaphysical.  *2 In The Castle it seems that “distractions” in the Pascalian sense are represented by the assistants who “distract” K.  from his anxiety.  If Frieda eventually becomes the mistress of one of the assistants, this is because she prefers the stage setting to truth, everyday life to shared anguish.  *3 This is obviously true only of the unfinished version of The Castle that Kafka left us.  But it is doubtful that the writer would have destroyed in the last chapters his novel’s unity of tone.  *4 Purity of heart.  *5 The only character without hope in The Castle is Amalia.  She is the one with whom the Land Surveyor is most violently contrasted.  *6 On the two aspects of Kafka’s thought, compare “In the Penal Colony,” published by the Cahiers du Sud (and in America by Partisan Review —translator’s note): “Guilt ‘of man’ is understood is never doubtful” and a fragment of The Castle (Momus’s report): “The guilt of the Land Surveyor K.  is hard to establish.” *7 What is offered above is obviously an interpretation of Kafka’s work.  But it is only fair to add that nothing prevents its being considered, aside from any interpretation, from a purely æsthetic point of view.  For instance, B.  Groethuysen in his remarkable preface to The Trial limits himself, more wisely than we, to following merely the painful fancies of what he calls, most strikingly, a daydreamer.  It is the fate and perhaps the greatness of that work that it offers everything and confirms nothing.  Copyright, The Myth of Sisyphus SECOND VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, NOVEMBER 2018 Copyright © 1955, and copyright renewed 1983, by Alfred A.  Knopf, a division of Penguin Random House LLC .  All rights reserved.  Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, and distributed in Canada by Random House of Canada, a division of Penguin Random House Canada Limited, Toronto.  Originally published in France as Le Mythe de Sisyphe .  Copyright © 1942 by Librairie Gallimard.  Originally published in the United States by Alfred A.  Knopf, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, in 1955.  Vintage is a registered trademark and Vintage International and colophon are trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.  The Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress.  Vintage International Trade Paperback ISBN 9780525564454 Ebook ISBN 9780525567004 Cover design by Helen Yentus www.vintagebooks.com v5.3.2 a Cover, The Myth of Sisyphus Title Page, The Myth of Sisyphus Other Titles, The Myth of Sisyphus ALSO BY ALBERT CAMUS Awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1957 Notebooks 1942–1951 ( Carnets, janvier 1942–mars 1951 ) 1965 Notebooks 1935–1942 ( Carnets, mai 1935—février 1942 ) 1963 Resistance, Rebellion, and Death ( Actuelles—a selection ) 1961 The Possessed (Les Possédés) 1960 Caligula and Three Other Plays ( Caligula, Le Malentendu, L’État de siège, Les Justes ) 1958 Exile and the Kingdom ( L’Exil et le Royaume ) 1958 The Fall ( La Chute ) 1957 The Rebel ( L’Homme Révolté ) 1954 The Plague ( La Peste ) 1948 The Stranger ( L’Étranger ) 1946 The Myth of Sisyphus, The Myth of Sisyphus THE MYTH OF SISYPHUS T HE GODS had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock to the top of a mountain, whence the stone would fall back of its own weight.  They had thought with some reason that there is no more dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor.  If one believes Homer, Sisyphus was the wisest and most prudent of mortals.  According to another tradition, however, he was disposed to practice the profession of highwayman.  I see no contradiction in this.  Opinions differ as to the reasons why he became the futile laborer of the underworld.  To begin with, he is accused of a certain levity in regard to the gods.  He stole their secrets.  Ægina, the daughter of Æsopus, was carried off by Jupiter.  The father was shocked by that disappearance and complained to Sisyphus.  He, who knew of the abduction, offered to tell about it on condition that Æsopus would give water to the citadel of Corinth.  To the celestial thunderbolts he preferred the benediction of water.  He was punished for this in the underworld.  Homer tells us also that Sisyphus had put Death in chains.  Pluto could not endure the sight of his deserted, silent empire.  He dispatched the god of war, who liberated Death from the hands of her conqueror.  It is said also that Sisyphus, being near to death, rashly wanted to test his wife’s love.  He ordered her to cast his unburied body into the middle of the public square.  Sisyphus woke up in the underworld.  And there, annoyed by an obedience so contrary to human love, he obtained from Pluto permission to return to earth in order to chastise his wife.  But when he had seen again the face of this world, enjoyed water and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no longer wanted to go back to the infernal darkness.  Recalls, signs of anger, warnings were of no avail.  Many years more he lived facing the curve of the gulf, the sparkling sea, and the smiles of earth.  A decree of the gods was necessary.  Mercury came and seized the impudent man by the collar and, snatching him from his joys, led him forcibly back to the underworld, where his rock was ready for him.  You have already grasped that Sisyphus is the absurd hero.  He is , as much through his passions as through his torture.  His scorn of the gods, his hatred of death, and his passion for life won him that unspeakable penalty in which the whole being is exerted toward accomplishing nothing.  This is the price that must be paid for the passions of this earth.  Nothing is told us about Sisyphus in the underworld.  Myths are made for the imagination to breathe life into them.  As for this myth, one sees merely the whole effort of a body straining to raise the huge stone, to roll it and push it up a slope a hundred times over; one sees the face screwed up, the cheek tight against the stone, the shoulder bracing the clay-covered mass, the foot wedging it, the fresh start with arms outstretched, the wholly human security of two earth-clotted hands.  At the very end of his long effort measured by skyless space and time without depth, the purpose is achieved.  Then Sisyphus watches the stone rush down in a few moments toward that lower world whence he will have to push it up again toward the summit.  He goes back down to the plain.  It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me.  A face that toils so close to stones is already stone itself! I see that man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the torment of which he will never know the end.  That hour like a breathing-space which returns as surely as his suffering, that is the hour of consciousness.  At each of those moments when he leaves the heights and gradually sinks toward the lairs of the gods, he is superior to his fate.  He is stronger than his rock.  If this myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious.  Where would his torture be, indeed, if at every step the hope of succeeding upheld him? The workman of today works every day in his life at the same tasks, and this fate is no less absurd.  But it is tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes conscious.  Sisyphus, proletarian of the gods, powerless and rebellious, knows the whole extent of his wretched condition: it is what he thinks of during his descent.  The lucidity that was to constitute his torture at the same time crowns his victory.  There is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn.  * * * If the descent is thus sometimes performed in sorrow, it can also take place in joy.  This word is not too much.  Again I fancy Sisyphus returning toward his rock, and the sorrow was in the beginning.  When the images of earth cling too tightly to memory, when the call of happiness becomes too insistent, it happens that melancholy rises in man’s heart: this is the rock’s victory, this is the rock itself.  The boundless grief is too heavy to bear.  These are our nights of Gethsemane.  But crushing truths perish from being acknowledged.  Thus, Œdipus at the outset obeys fate without knowing it.  But from the moment he knows, his tragedy begins.  Yet at the same moment, blind and desperate, he realizes that the only bond linking him to the world is the cool hand of a girl.  Then a tremendous remark rings out: “Despite so many ordeals, my advanced age and the nobility of my soul make me conclude that all is well.” Sophocles’ Œdipus, like Dostoevsky’s Kirilov, thus gives the recipe for the absurd victory.  Ancient wisdom confirms modern heroism.  One does not discover the absurd without being tempted to write a manual of happiness.  “What! by such narrow ways—?” There is but one world, however.  Happiness and the absurd are two sons of the same earth.  They are inseparable.  It would be a mistake to say that happiness necessarily springs from the absurd discovery.  It happens as well that the feeling of the absurd springs from happiness.  “I conclude that all is well,” says Œdipus, and that remark is sacred.  It echoes in the wild and limited universe of man.  It teaches that all is not, has not been, exhausted.  It drives out of this world a god who had come into it with dissatisfaction and a preference for futile sufferings.  It makes of fate a human matter, which must be settled among men.  All Sisyphus’ silent joy is contained therein.  His fate belongs to him.  His rock is his thing.  Likewise, the absurd man, when he contemplates his torment, silences all the idols.  In the universe suddenly restored to its silence, the myriad wondering little voices of the earth rise up.  Unconscious, secret calls, invitations from all the faces, they are the necessary reverse and price of victory.  There is no sun without shadow, and it is essential to know the night.  The absurd man says yes and his effort will henceforth be unceasing.  If there is a personal fate, there is no higher destiny, or at least there is but one which he concludes is inevitable and despicable.  For the rest, he knows himself to be the master of his days.  At that subtle moment when man glances backward over his life, Sisyphus returning toward his rock, in that slight pivoting he contemplates that series of unrelated actions which becomes his fate, created by him, combined under his memory’s eye and soon sealed by his death.  Thus, convinced of the wholly human origin of all that is human, a blind man eager to see who knows that the night has no end, he is still on the go.  The rock is still rolling.  I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds one’s burden again.  But Sisyphus teaches the higher fidelity that negates the gods and raises rocks.  He too concludes that all is well.  This universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither sterile nor futile.  Each atom of that stone, each mineral flake of that night-filled mountain, in itself forms a world.  The struggle itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man’s heart.  One must imagine Sisyphus happy.  Fear and Trembling Problema III Was it Ethically Defensible of Abraham to Conceal his Purpose from Sarah, from Eleazar, from Isaac? The ethical is as such the universal; as the universal it is in turn the disclosed.  Seen as an immediate, no more than sensate and psychic being, the individual is concealed.  So his ethical task is to unwrap himself from this concealment and become disclosed in the universal.  Thus whenever he wants to remain in concealment, he sins and is in a state of temptation, from which he can emerge only by disclosing himself.  We find ourselves again at the same point.  Unless there is a concealment which has its basis in the single individual’s being higher than the universal, then Abraham’s conduct cannot be defended, since he disregarded the intermediate ethical considerations.  If, however, there is such a concealment, then we face the paradox, which cannot be mediated, just because it is based on the single individual’s being, in his particularity, higher than the universal, and it is precisely the universal that is the mediation.  The Hegelian philosophy assumes there is no justified concealment, no justified incommensurability.  It is therefore consistent in its requirement of disclosure, but it isn’t quite fair and square in wanting to regard Abraham as the father of faith and to speak about faith.  For faith is not the first immediacy but a later one.  The first immediacy is the aesthetic, and here the Hegelian philosophy may well be right.  But faith is not the aesthetic, or if it is, then faith has never existed just because it has existed always.  It will be best here to look at the whole matter in a purely aesthetic way and for that purpose embark on an aesthetic inquiry, which I would ask the reader for the time being to enter wholeheartedly into, while I for my part will adapt my presentation accordingly.  The category I would like to examine a little more closely is that of the interesting, a category that especially today (just because we live in discrimine rerum at a turning-point in human affairs) has acquired great importance, for really it is the category of crisis.  Therefore one should not, as sometimes happens, when one has been oneself enamoured of it pro virili with all one’s strength, disdain the category because it has passed one by; but neither should one be too greedy for it, for what is certain is that to become of interest, for one’s life to be interesting, has nothing to do with what you can turn your hand to but is a fateful privilege which, like every privilege in the world of spirit, can only be purchased in deep pain.  Thus Socrates was the most interesting person that has lived, his life the most interesting that has been led, but that existence was allotted to him by the deity, and since he had to work for it he was no stranger to trouble and pain.  Taking such an existence in vain ill-becomes someone who takes life seriously, and yet such attempts are nowadays not infrequently observed.  The category of the interesting is, moreover, a borderline one, it marks the boundary between the aesthetic and the ethical.  For that reason in our inquiry we must be constantly glancing over into the territory of ethics, while to give our inquiries weight the problem must be grasped with genuine aesthetic feeling.  These days ethics rarely considers such things.  The reason is supposed to be that there is no room for them in the System.  But then doing so in monographs should be all right; and besides, if one doesn’t want to be long-winded about it one can achieve the same results by being brief, so long as one has the predicate in one’s power; for a predicate or two can reveal a whole world.  Is there no room in the System for little words like these? Aristotle says in his immortal Poetics: ‘duo men oun tou muthou meri, peri taut’ esti, peripeteia kai anagnorisis’ (cf.  Ch.  II) ’...  indeed two parts in the myth, namely sudden change of fortune the reverse (on which the plot of a tragedy turns) and recognition, concern these things‘.  Naturally only the second feature, anagnorisis, recognition, concerns me here.  Whenever there is recognition there is eo ipso a question of prior concealment.  Just as the recognition is the resolving factor, or the element of relaxation in the life of drama, so is concealment the element of tension.  What Aristotle says earlier in the same chapter in respect of the consequences for the worth of tragedy of the question whether peripeteia and anagnorisis clash, as well as of the ‘single’ and ‘double’ recognition, I cannot go into here, even though the sincerity and quiet absorption of Aristotle’s discussion have an inevitable attraction for one long since tired of the superficial omniscience of the synopticists.  A general observation must suffice.  In Greek tragedy concealment (and therefore recognition) is an epic survival based on a fate in which the dramatic action disappears from view, and from which it acquires its obscure and enigmatic origin.  This is why the effect produced by a Greek tragedy bears a resemblance to the impression given by a marble statue that lacks the power of the eye.  Greek tragedy is blind.  Hence it takes a certain abstraction to appreciate it.  A son murders his father, but not until later learns it is his father.  A sister is about to sacrifice her brother, but at the decisive moment discovers that is who it is.  Tragedy of this nature is less apt to interest our reflective age.  Modern drama has given up the idea of Fate, has in dramatic respects emancipated itself; it observes, it looks in upon itself, takes fate up into its dramatic consciousness.  Concealment and disclosure then become the hero’s free act, for which he is responsible.  Recognition and concealment are also an essential part of modern drama.  It would take us too far to give examples.  I am courteous enough to assume that everyone in this so aesthetically voluptuous age, so potent and aroused that conception occurs as easily as with the partridge which, Aristotle says, needs only to hear the voice of the cock or its flight overhead — to assume that at the mere sound of the word ‘concealment’ everyone can easily shake a dozen romances and comedies from his sleeve.  I can therefore be brief and offer straightaway a fairly broad observation.  If the person doing the hiding, i.e.  the one who puts the dramatic yeast into the play, hides something nonsensical, we have comedy.  But if the concealer is related to the idea, he may come close to being a tragic hero.  To give just one example of the comic.  A man puts on make-up and wears a wig.  The same man wants to have success with the fair sex, and is sure enough of conquests with the help of the make-up and wig, which there is no doubt make him irresistible.  He captures a girl and is on the pinnacle of joy.  But now for the point.  If he can admit his deception, will he not lose all of his powers of fascination once he is revealed as a quite ordinary, in fact even bald-headed male? Doesn’t he have to lose the loved one again? Concealment is his free action, for which aesthetics holds him responsible.  But that discipline is no friend of bald hypocrites, and will leave him to the mercy of our laughter.  Let that suffice as a hint of what I mean, since we cannot include comedy in the terms of this investigation.  My procedure here must be to let concealment pass dialectically between aesthetics and ethics, for the point is to show how absolutely different the paradox and aesthetic concealment are from one another.  A few examples.  A girl is secretly in love, though neither party has openly confessed its love to the other.  Her parents force her to marry another (she may even be motivated out of considerations of duty).  She obeys.  She hides her love ‘so as not to make the other unhappy, and no one will ever know what she suffers’.  — Or a young lad is in a position, just by dropping one word, to possess the object of his craving and restless dreams.  But that little word will compromise, yes, even, who knows, ruin an entire family.  He nobly chooses to stay in concealment, ‘the girl must never know, so that she can perhaps find happiness with another’.  What a pity that these two, both concealed from their respective loved ones, are also concealed from one another! For otherwise a remarkable higher unity might have been brought about.  — Their concealment is a free act, for which even aesthetically they are responsible.  However, aesthetics is a respectful and sentimental discipline which knows more ways of fixing things than any assistant house-manager.  So what does it do? It does everything possible for the lovers.  By means of a coincidence the respective partners in the projected marriages get wind of the other party’s noble decision.  Explanations follow.  They get each other and as a bonus the rank of real heroes as well; for notwithstanding they have had no time even to sleep on their heroic resolutions, aesthetics sees it as if they had bravely fought for their goal over many years.  For aesthetics doesn’t bother much about time; it goes just as quickly whether in jest or earnest.  But ethics knows nothing either of this coincidence or this sentimentality.  Nor does it have such a rapid concept of time.  Thus the matter acquires a different complexion.  You can’t argue with ethics, because it uses pure categories.  It doesn’t appeal to experience, which of all laughable things is perhaps the most laughable and, far from making a man wise, if he knows nothing higher it will sooner make him mad.  Ethics has no coincidence, so no explanations follow; it doesn’t flirt with thoughts of dignity, it puts an enormous burden of responsibility on the hero’s frail shoulders; it condemns as presumptuous his thought of wanting to play providence in his action, but also condemns him for wanting to do likewise with his suffering.  It enjoins the belief in reality and the courage to contend with all its tribulations, rather than with those bloodless sufferings he has taken on himself by his own responsibility; it warns against putting faith in the calculating shrewdness of reason, more treacherous than the oracles of the ancients.  It warns against all misplaced magnanimity.  Let reality decide the occasion, that is the time to show courage.  But then ethics, too, will offer every possible assistance.  If something deeper had been stirring in those two, however, if there had been a seriousness to see the task, to set about it, then no doubt something would have come of them.  But ethics cannot help them.  Ethics is offended because they are keeping a secret from it, a secret they have incurred on their own responsibility.  Thus aesthetics called for concealment and rewarded it.  Ethics called for disclosure and punished concealment.  Sometimes, however, even aesthetics calls for disclosure.  When the hero held captive in the aesthetic illusion believes he can save another by his silence, aesthetics calls for silence and rewards it.  But when the hero’s action involves interfering in another person’s life, it calls for disclosure.  Now I am talking of the tragic hero.  Consider for a moment Euripides’s Iphigenia in Aulis.  Agamemnon is about to sacrifice Iphigenia.  Now aesthetics calls for Agamemnon’s silence, in so far as it would be unworthy of the hero to seek another’s consolation, just as he should keep it quiet as long as possible for the women’s sake.  On the other hand the hero, to be that, has also to be tested in the terrible temptation incurred by the tears of Clytemnestra and Iphigenia.  What does aesthetics do? It has a way out; it has an old servant standing by who discloses everything to Clytemnestra.  And now everything is as it should be.  Ethics, however, has no coincidence, and no old servant standing by.  The aesthetic idea contradicts itself as soon as it is applied in reality.  Ethics therefore demands disclosure.  The tragic hero demonstrates exactly this ethical courage by, not himself being captive to the aesthetic illusion, taking it upon himself to tell Iphigenia her fate.  In this the tragic hero is the beloved son of ethics, in whom she is well pleased.  If he remains silent, it may be because by doing so he makes it easier for others, or it could also be because it makes it easier for himself.  But the tragic hero knows he is free of the latter incentive.  In keeping silent here he would be assuming responsibility as an individual, inasmuch as he is impervious to any argument from outside.  But this, as tragic hero, he cannot do; for it is just in so far as he continues to express the universal that ethics loves him.  His heroic action requires courage, but part of that courage is that he shirks no argument.  Now tears, certainly, are a terrible argumentum ad hominem, and there are no doubt those whom nothing else touches but who can still be stirred by tears.  The play lets Iphigenia weep, in fact like Jephthah’s daughter she should have been allowed two months to weep, not in solitude but at her father’s feet, to use all her art ‘which is but tears’, and twine herself instead of the olive branch about his knees (cf.  v.  1224).  Aesthetics required disclosure but availed itself of a coincidence; ethics required disclosure and found satisfaction in the tragic hero.  For all the strictness of the ethical requirement of disclosure, it cannot be denied that secrecy and silence, as determinants of inner feeling, really make for greatness in a man.  When Amor leaves Psyche he says to her, ‘You will give birth to a child who will be divine if you say nothing, but human if you betray the secret.’ The tragic hero, the darling of ethics, is a purely human being, and he is someone I can understand, someone all of whose undertakings are in the open.  If I go further I always run up against the paradox, the divine and the demonic; for silence is both of these.  It is the demon’s lure, and the more silent one keeps the more terrible the demon becomes; but silence is also divinity’s communion with the individual.  Before coming back to the story of Abraham, however, I would like to present some poetic personages.  By exercising the power of dialectic over them I shall keep them at extremes, and by waving the scourge of despair over them I should prevent them from standing still, so that in their anguish they might perhaps bring something or other to light.  6 Aristotle tells in his Politics of a political disturbance in Delphi, arising from a marriage.  The bridegroom, for whom the augurs had predicted a misfortune as a result of his forthcoming marriage, at the crucial moment, when he is to fetch the bride, suddenly changes his plans — he won’t go through with the wedding.  That is all I need.  7 In Delphi this surely did not pass off without tears.  If a poet took it up he could doubtless count on arousing sympathy.  Is it not terrible that the love so often excluded in life should here also be deprived of the aid of heaven? Isn’t the old proverb that marriages are made in heaven here put to shame? Usually it is the trials and tribulations of finitude which, like evil spirits, would separate the lovers, while love itself has heaven on its side and this holy alliance overwhelms all foes.  Here it is heaven itself that separates what heaven, after all, has joined together.  Who would have guessed? The young bride least of all.  A moment earlier she was sitting in her room in all her beauty, and the sweet young maids had adorned her with such care that they would be prepared to justify their handiwork before the whole world, that it gave them more than happiness, it even made them envious - yes, even happy that they couldn’t be even more envious, since she could not have been more beautiful.  Sitting there alone in her room she was then transfigured from one beauty to another; for all that a woman’s art could accomplish had been turned virtuously to the embellishment of virtue.  But there still lacked something the young girl had not dreamed of, a veil, finer, lighter, and yet more concealing than the one in which the young maids had enveloped her, a bridal gown no maid had knowledge of or could help her with, even the bride herself did not know how to put it on.  It was an unseen, friendly influence which takes satisfaction in adorning a bride and wraps itself around her without her knowledge, for all she saw was the bridegroom walking by on his way to the temple.  She saw the door close after him, and she became even more calm and blissful, for she knew that he now belonged to her more than ever.  The temple door opened, he stepped out, but demurely she turned her gaze down and so did not see that his face was troubled.  Yet he saw that heaven must be jealous of the bride’s loveliness and of his good fortune.  The temple door opened, the young maids saw the bridegroom step out, but they did not see that his face was troubled, for they were busy about bringing the bride.  Then she came forward in all her maidenly modesty, and yet like a mistress surrounded by her cortege of young maids of honour, who curtsied before her as a young maid always curtsies before a bride.  Thus at the head of her lovely troupe she stood and waited — it was but a moment, for the temple was close by — and the bridegroom came, but he passed by her door.  But here I break off.  I am not a poet, I only practise dialectics.  One should note first of all that it is at the crucial moment that the hero learns what is in store, so he is pure and blameless, hasn’t bound himself irresponsibly to the loved one.  Second, it is a divine utterance he has before him, or rather against him, so he is not ruled like those feeble lovers and sweethearts by conceit.  Further, it goes without saying that this utterance makes him just as unhappy as the bride, indeed rather more so since after all he is the occasion.  True, the augurs only predicted a misfortune for him, but the question is whether the misfortune is not of such a nature as to affect also their marital happiness.  So what is he to do? (I) Is he to remain silent and get married and think ‘Perhaps the misfortune won’t come right away, and anyway I have been true to my love and not afraid to make myself unhappy; but I must remain silent, otherwise even the brief moment is lost.’ This sounds plausible but is in fact by no means so, for in this he insults the girl.  By keeping silent he has in a way made her guilty, for had she known the truth she would never have given her consent to such a union.  So in the hour of need he will have to bear not only the misfortune but also the responsibility for not having said anything, as well as her righteous anger at his not having said anything.  (2) Is he to remain silent and not get married? In that case he must enter into a deception in which he annihilates himself in his relation to her.  Aesthetics might approve of this.  The catastrophe could then be fashioned as in the real story except that at the last moment there would be explanations, though too late since aesthetically it will be necessary to let him die, unless that discipline can see its way to revoking the fateful prophecy.  Yet, noble as this conduct may be, it involves an insult to the girl and the reality of her love.  (3) Is he to speak? Naturally one mustn’t forget that our hero is a little too poetic for the giving up of his love to have no importance except as an unsuccessful business venture.  If he speaks, then the whole thing becomes an unfortunate love-story in the vein of Axel and Valborg.  They will be a couple whom heaven itself puts asunder.  Nevertheless in the present case this separation is to be conceived somewhat differently, since it, too, is also the result of the free acts of the individuals.  For what is so very difficult with the dialectic in this case is that the misfortune is to affect only him.  These two, then, do not find a common expression of their suffering, as do Axel and Valborg, whom heaven separates equally from each other because they are equally close to each other.  8 If that were the case here, a way out could be found.  For since heaven uses no visible power to separate them, but leaves it to them, one could well imagine that they ended united in defiance of heaven together with its misfortune.  Ethics, however, will require him to speak.  The essence of his valour in that case is to be found in his giving up his aesthetic high-mindedness, which here could hardly be thought to contain any admixture of the vanity connected with concealment, since it must be clear to him that he still makes the girl unhappy.  The reality of this heroism is based, however, on its having had and cancelled its presupposition that he genuinely loved her and kept quiet for her sake and not his — translator’s addition; for otherwise we would get heroes enough, particularly in our own time which has acquired a matchless proficiency in the forgery that does the highest by skipping over what lies in between.  But why this sketch if I nevertheless come no further than the tragic hero? Because it might still throw light on the paradox.  That all depends on our hero’s relationship to that utterance of the augur’s, which in one way or another is going to decide the course of his life.  Is this utterance publici juris public property or is it a privatissimum private matter? The scene is laid in Greece; an augur’s utterance is intelligible to all — I don’t mean just in the sense that the individual can grasp the content lexically, but that the individual can understand that what an augur is conveying to him is a decision of heaven’s.  So the augur’s utterance is intelligible not just to the hero but to everyone and results in no private relation to the divine.  Turn where he will, what was prophesied will happen, and neither by doing anything nor by refraining from doing anything will he come into a closer relationship with the divine, become an object either of divine mercy or of divine wrath.  The outcome will be as understandable to anyone as to the hero, and there is no secret writing that only the hero can read.  So should he want to speak he can perfectly well do so, for he can make himself understood; and if he wants to remain silent it is because he wants, by virtue of being the single individual, to be higher than the universal, wants to delude himself with all manner of phantasies about how she will soon forget this sorrow, etc.  On the other hand, if the will of heaven had not been announced to him by an augur, if it had been made known to him in some quite private way, if it had placed itself in a quite private relationship to him, then we are with the paradox - supposing there is such a thing (since my reflections here have the form of a dilemma) — then he could not speak however much he might wish to.  He would not enjoy his own silence but suffer the pain, yet for him just this would be the assurance he needed that he did right.  So the reason for his silence would not be a wish to place himself as the single individual in an absolute relation to the universal, but to be placed as the single individual in an absolute relationship to the absolute.  In this, so far as I can tell, he would also be able to find repose, whereas the requirements of the ethical would be constantly disturbing his high-minded silence.  One only wishes that aesthetics might try to start where for so many years it has ended, with the illusion of high-mindedness.  As soon as it did so it would work hand in hand with religion, for that is the only power capable of rescuing the aesthetic from its conflict with the ethical.  Queen Elizabeth sacrifices to the State her love for Essex by signing his death-warrant.  That was a deed of heroism, even if some private resentment had a hand in it because he hadn’t sent her the ring.  We know that he did send it, but it was held back through the malice of some lady-in-waiting.  Elizabeth is said, ni fallor if I am not mistaken, to have been informed of this, and sat for ten days with one finger in her mouth, biting it without saying a word, and then she died.  That would be something for a poet who knew how to wrench open the mouth; otherwise it would be of use at best to a ballet master, with whom nowadays the poet no doubt too often confuses himself.  I now want to follow this by a sketch along the lines of the demonic.  For this I shall use the legend of Agnete and the Merman.  The merman is a seducer who rises up from concealment in the depths, and in wild desire grasps and breaks the innocent flower standing in all its charm by the shore, pensively bending its head to the ocean’s roar.  That is what the poets have so far made of it.  Let us make a change.  The merman was a seducer.  He has called out to Agnete, with his smooth talk has coaxed from her her secret thoughts.  She has found in the merman what she was seeking, what she gazed down to find in the depths of the sea.  Agnete is willing to follow him down.  The merman has taken her into his arms, Agnete twines hers about his neck trustingly and with all her soul she abandons herself to the stronger one.  He is already at the sea-edge, bending over the water to dive down with his prey.  Then Agnete looks at him again, not fearfully, not questioningly, not proud of her good luck, not intoxicated with desire, but in absolute faith, with absolute humility, like the humble flower she deemed herself to be; with absolute confidence she entrusts to him her entire fate.  — And look! The ocean roars no more, its wild voice is stilled, nature’s passion - which is the merman’s strength — deserts him, the sea becomes dead calm.  And still Agnete is looking at him in this way.  Then the merman collapses, he is unable to resist the power of innocence, his element becomes unfaithful to him, he cannot seduce Agnete.  He leads her home again, he explains to her that he only wanted to show her how beautiful the sea is when it is calm, and Agnete believes him.  Then he turns back alone, and the ocean rages, but more wildly still rages the merman’s despair.  He can seduce Agnete, he can seduce hundreds of Agnetes, he can charm any girl — but Agnete has triumphed and the merman has lost her.  Only as his prize can she become his; he cannot belong faithfully to any girl, for he is only a merman.  I have allowed myself a slight modification 9 in the merman.  In fact I have slightly altered Agnete too.  In the legend Agnete is by no means guiltless — and in general it is nonsense and sheer coquetry as well as an insult to the female sex to imagine a seduction where the girl is in no way, in no way at all, to blame.  In the legend Agnete is, to modernize my expression somewhat, a woman who hankers for ‘the interesting’, and one such can always be certain there is a merman in the offing; for mermen keep a weather-eye open for the likes of these and they make for them like a shark for its prey.  It is therefore very foolish to suppose (or is it a rumour spread abroad by the merman?) that so-called refinement protects a girl from seduction.  No, life is more just and fair; there is only one means of protection, it is innocence.  We will now give the merman a human consciousness, and let his being a merman indicate a human pre-existence in the consequences of which his life has become entangled.  There is nothing to prevent his being a hero; for the step he now takes is reconciliatory.  He is saved by Agnete, the seducer is crushed, he has bowed to the power of innocence, he can never seduce again.  But immediately two powers claim control of him: repentance alone and repentance with Agnete.  If repentance alone takes possession of him he remains concealed, if repentance and Agnete take possession of him he is disclosed.  And the sea roars and the waves foam, and the merman embraces Agnete, and dives with her into the depths.  Never had he been so wild, never so full of desire; for with this girl he had hoped for his deliverance.  Before long he became tired of Agnete, but her body was never found: for she became a mermaid, who tempted men with her songs.  Now in so far as repentance alone grips the merman and he remains concealed, then he must certainly make Agnete unhappy; for Agnete loved him in all her innocence, she believed him that moment when even to her he seemed changed, however well he concealed it, and said he only wanted to show her the beautiful calm of the sea.  However, as far as passion is concerned, the merman himself becomes even more unhappy; for he loved Agnete with a multiplicity of passions and has a new guilt to bear besides.  The demonic side of repentance will now no doubt explain to him that this is precisely his punishment, and the more it torments him the better.  If he gives in to this demonic possibility, he may make one more attempt to save Agnete, in the way one can in a sense save someone by resort to evil.  He knows Agnete loves him.  If he can only tear this love away from her she will in a way be saved.  But how to do that? The merman has too much sense to reckon that a candid confession will arouse her disgust.  Then perhaps he will try to arouse all dark passions in her, scorn her, mock her, hold her love up to ridicule, if possible stir up her pride.  He will spare himself no torment, for this is the deep contradiction in the demonic and in a sense there dwells infinitely more good in a demonic than in a superficial person.  The more selfish Agnete is, the more easily she will be deceived (only those with very little experience think it easy to deceive innocence, life is very profound and it is the astute who find it easiest to trick one another), but all the more terribly the merman will suffer.  The more ingeniously contrived his deception the less will Agnete bashfully hide her own pain from him; she will use every means, not without effect, not, that is, to shake him loose but to torment him.  By means of the demonic the merman would thus aspire to be the single individual who as the particular is higher than the universal.  The demonic has that same property as the divine, that the individual can enter into an absolute relationship to it.  This is the analogue, the counterpart to the paradox we are discussing.  It therefore bears a certain resemblance to it that can prove misleading.  Thus the merman apparently has the proof of the justification of his silence that it is because of it that he suffers all his pain.  However, there is no doubt that he can speak.  So he can be a tragic hero, to my mind a tragic hero on the grand scale, if he does speak.  Perhaps only few will understand what the grandeur consists in.  10 He will then have the courage to free himself of all self-deception about being able to make Agnete happy by his art; he will have the courage to crush Agnete, humanly speaking.  Here I will just add a psychological observation.  The more selfish we make Agnete, the more effective the self-deception will be, indeed it is not inconceivable that with his demonic astuteness a merman might in reality not only have, humanly speaking, saved Agnete but brought something exceptional out of her.  A demon knows how to torture powers out of even the weakest person, and in his way he can have the best intentions towards a human being.  The merman stands at a dialectical extremity.  If he is saved from the demonic side of repentance two paths are possible.  He can hold himself back, remain in hiding, but not depend on his astuteness.  In that case he does not come as the single individual into an absolute relation to the demonic, but finds repose in the counter-paradox that the divine will save Agnete.  (This is how the movement would have been made in the Middle Ages, for on its conception the merman has obviously dedicated himself to the monastery.) Or else he can be saved through Agnete.  Now this must not be understood as meaning that Agnete’s love might save him from being a seducer in the future (that is an aesthetic rescue attempt, which always avoids the main issue, namely the continuity in the merman’s life); in that respect he is already saved.  He will be saved in so far as he is disclosed.  So he marries Agnete.  But he must still resort to the paradox.  For when through his own guilt the individual has come out of the universal, he can only return to it on the strength of having come, as the particular, into an absolute relation to the absolute.  Here I will insert a comment which takes us further than anything that has been said anywhere in the foregoing.  11 Sin is not the first immediacy, sin is a later immediacy.  In sin the individual is already in terms of the demonic paradox higher than the universal, because it is a contradiction on the part of the universal to want to impose itself on someone who lacks the conditio sine qua non the necessary condition.  Should philosophy, amongst its other conceits, imagine that someone might actually want to follow its precepts in practice, a curious comedy would emerge.  An ethics that ignores sin is an altogether futile discipline, but once it postulates sin it has eo ipso thereby gone beyond itself.  Philosophy tells us that the immediate is to be superseded ophœvet, German aufgehoben .  True enough, but what is not true is that sin, any more than faith, is without further ado the immediate.  Everything goes smoothly so long as I move in these spheres, but in fact not even what is said here helps to explain Abraham.  He did not become the single individual through sin; on the contrary he was that righteous man who is God’s chosen.  So any analogy with Abraham will only surface after the individual has become capable of accomplishing the universal, and now the paradox is repeated.  I can therefore understand the movements of the merman, but I cannot understand Abraham.  It is to realize the universal that the merman has recourse to the paradox.  If he stays hidden and dedicates himself to all the torments of repentance, he becomes a demon, and as such is brought to nothing.  If he stays hidden but entertains no clever thoughts about being able to extricate Agnete at the cost of his own torment in the bondage of repentance, he will no doubt find peace but is lost to the world.  If he discloses himself, lets himself be saved through Agnete, then he is the greatest human being I can imagine.  It is only aesthetics which irresponsibly thinks it can praise the power of love by letting the lost man be loved by an innocent girl and saved thereby.  Only aesthetics mistakes what it sees and thinks the girl rather than the merman is the hero.  So the merman cannot belong to Agnete before, after making the infinite movement of repentance, he has made one more movement, that on the strength of the absurd.  His own strength suffices for the movement of repentance, but it calls for absolutely all his energies, and it is therefore impossible for him by his own strength to return and grasp reality.  If one lacks sufficient passion to make either movement, when one scrimps through life, repenting a little and thinking the rest will take care of itself, one has given up living in the idea once and for all, and then it is very easy to reach, and help others reach, the highest; i.e.  delude oneself and others with the notion that the world of spirit is like Gnavspil a card game, where everyone cheats.  So one can amuse oneself by reflecting how strange it is that just in an age when everyone can reach the highest there should be such widespread doubt about the immortality of the soul; since even someone who has only, but genuinely, made the movement of infinity can scarcely be called a doubter.  The conclusions of passion are the only reliable, i.e.  the only convincing, ones.  Fortunately life is in this case more kindly, more faithful, than the wise would have it.  It excludes no one, not even the humblest; it tricks nobody, for in the world of spirit the only people who are tricked are those who trick themselves.  It is the general opinion, and as far as I dare be my own judge, also my own, that entering the monastery is not the highest.  But I by no means believe on that account that the fact that nobody goes into monasteries today means that we are all greater than those profound and earnest souls who found repose there.  How many people are there now with the passion to think this thought and then judge themselves honestly? The very idea of thus taking time on one’s conscience, of giving conscience time to search out with its sleepless perseverance every secret thought, so that unless one is making the movement every instant on the strength of what is noblest and most holy in a human being one can discover with anguish and horror, 12 and call forth by anguish itself if by nothing else, the dark passions which after all lie concealed in every human life, whereas living in society with others one so easily forgets, so easily avoids, is in so many ways held above all this, gets the chance to start again - this very idea, grasped with decent respect, I would have thought could in itself chasten many an individual in this age of ours which thinks it has already reached the highest.  Yet such things worry people little in this age that thinks it has reached the heights, though no age has fallen so much victim to the comic than ours.  Indeed it is hard to grasp why it hasn’t already given birth, by a generatio cequivoca spontaneous generation, to its hero, that demon who will stage without scruple that horrifying play that reduces the whole age to laughter and to unconsciousness of the fact that it is laughing at itself.  Indeed what more is life worth than to be laughed at when people have already reached the highest by the time they are twenty? And yet what higher movement has the age come up with since people gave up entering monasteries? Is it not a contemptible worldliness, a circumspection and pusillanimity that sits at the head of the table, cravenly making people think they have reached the highest, and even slyly dissuading them from trying anything less? A person who has made the monastery movement has only one movement to go, that of the absurd.  How many nowadays understand what the absurd is, how many live in such a way as to have renounced or gained everything, how many are even simply honest enough to know what they are and what they can and cannot do? And is it not true that if there are such, they are mostly to be found among the less educated and in part among women? Just as a demonic person always reveals himself without understanding himself, our age betrays its own defects in a kind of clairvoyance, for it is always calling for the comical.  If that was really what it needed then perhaps the theatre would need a new play in which someone’s dying for love was treated as comedy.  Or would it not be better for our age if that were really to happen, if it were actually to witness such an occurrence, so that it might acquire the courage to believe in the power of spirit, the courage to stop abjectly stifling its better impulses, stop jealously stifling them in others - with laughter? Does the age really need a ridiculous Erscheinung appearance, show of an enthusiast in order to have something to laugh at? Or does it not rather need such an enthusiastic figure in reality to remind it of what it has forgotten? If one wants a scenario along similar lines but more moving because the passion of repentance is not awakened, one can use a story from the Book of Tobit.  The young Tobias wishes to marry Sarah, the daughter of Raguel and Edna.  But the girl is surrounded in tragedy.  She has been betrothed to seven men all of whom have died in the bride’s house.  For my scenario this is a flaw in the story, since there is something almost irresistibly comical in the thought of a girl’s seven vain attempts to get married, although so near success, as near as a student who fails his finals seven times.  The Book of Tobit places the accent elsewhere and that makes the high number important and in a certain sense even contributes to the tragic effect.  It enhances the young Tobias’s high-mindedness, partly because he is his parents’ only son (6.14), partly because the deterrent obtrudes the more strongly.  So this feature must be omitted.  Sarah, then, is a girl who has never been in love, who still nurtures a young girl’s notion of bliss, her immense mortgage in life, her Vollmachtbrief zum Glücke authorization for happiness - to love a man with all her heart.  And yet she is the most unhappy of all, for she knows that the evil demon that loves her will kill the bridegroom on the wedding night.  I have read of much sorrow, but I doubt if anywhere there is a sorrow as deep as that residing in the life of that girl.  Nevertheless when the misfortune comes from outside there is a certain consolation.  If life fails to bring a person what would make him happy, it is still a comfort that he could have received it.  But the unfathomable sorrow which no time can disperse, no time heal, is to know that it would be no use even if life were to do everything! A Greek author conceals so infinitely much in his crude naïvet é when he says: ‘pantos gar oudeis Erota epfugen i feuksetai mechri an kallos i kai ofthalmoi Bleposin’ ’...  for certainly no one has yet altogether escaped love, and none shall so long as there is beauty and eyes to see‘ (cf.  Longi Pastoralia).  Many a girl has been made unhappy in love, but she became unhappy; Sarah was so before she became it.  It is hard enough that one should not find the one to whom one can devote oneself, but unspeakably hard to be unable to devote oneself.  A young girl surrenders herself to someone and then she is said no longer to be free, but Sarah was never free and yet never surrendered herself to anyone.  It is hard enough that a girl should surrender herself to someone and be deceived by her love, but Sarah was deceived before she surrendered herself.  What world of sorrow is not contained in what follows, when at length Tobias wishes to marry Sarah! What wedding-rites, what preparations! No girl was ever cheated as Sarah.  She was cheated of the most blessed of all things, the absolute wealth which even the poorest girl possesses, cheated of the secure, unbounded, unfettered, unbridled self-surrender of devotion.  For first there had to be the ritual of purification by placing the heart of a fish and its liver on glowing embers.  And what a mother’s leave-taking of the daughter who, just as she herself has been cheated of everything, must also cheat her own mother of her most beautiful possession.  One just reads the narrative.  Edna prepared the chamber and brought Sarah into it and wept, and she received the tears of her daughter - and said to her, ‘My child, take heart.  The Lord of heaven and earth may exchange your sorrow for joy.  Daughter, take heart.’ And now the moment for the wedding.  We read on, if we can for tears: ‘But when the door was shut and they were together, Tobias rose from the bed and said, “Rise up, sister, and we will pray that the Lord may have mercy on us”’ (8.4).  Were a poet to read this story and use it, I wager a hundred to one he would place all the emphasis on the young Tobias.  The heroism of being willing to risk his life in such obvious danger, of which the narrative reminds us once again, for the morning after the wedding Raguel says to Edna: ‘Send one of the maids to see if he is still alive, so that, if not, we can bury him and no one will know it’ (cf.  8.13) - this heroism would have been the theme for the poet.  I venture to propose another.  Certainly Tobias acted gallantly, resolutely, and chivalrously, but any man who lacks courage to do that is a milksop who knows neither what love is nor what it is to be a man, nor what is worth living for.  He has not even grasped the little mystery that it is better to give than to receive, and has no inkling of what the great mystery is, namely that it is much harder to receive than to give, that is if one has had the courage to go without and did not prove a coward in the hour of need.  No, Sarah is the heroine.  Her I would like to draw close to as I have drawn close to no other girl, or been tempted to draw close in thought to anyone of whom I have read.  For what love for God it takes to want to be healed when one has been crippled from the start for no fault of one’s own, an unsuccessful specimen of humanity from the very beginning! What ethical maturity to take on the responsibility of allowing the loved one such an act of daring! What humility before another person! What faith in God that in the next instant she should not hate the man to whom she owed everything! Let Sarah be a man and the demonic will not be far away.  A proud and noble nature can endure everything, but one thing it cannot endure, it cannot endure pity.  Pity implies an indignity that for such a person can only be inflicted from above, for in himself he can never become an object of pity.  If he has sinned he can endure the punishment without despairing, but to be singled out from his mother’s womb as an object of pity, a sweet fragrance in pity’s nostrils, that he cannot bear.  Pity has a curious dialectic; one moment it calls for guilt, the next it wants to do away with it, and so to be predestined to pity is the more dreadful the greater the individual’s misfortune lies in the direction of the spiritual.  But no guilt attaches to Sarah, she is thrown as a prey to every suffering and on top of that has to be tortured by human sympathy, for even I who admire her more than Tobias loves her, even I cannot mention her name without exclaiming ‘The poor girl!’ Let a man take Sarah’s place, let him know that if he is to love a girl an infernal spirit will come and murder her on the wedding night, then he would certainly be likely to choose the demonic, shut himself up in himself and say in his heart, as does the demonic nature, ‘Thanks, I am no friend of ceremony and fuss, I don’t at all insist on the pleasures of love, I can just as well be a Bluebeard who gets his pleasure seeing girls die on their wedding night.’ One generally hears very little about the demonic, in spite of this territory’s having a peculiarly valid claim to discovery in our time, and notwithstanding that once he knows how to establish a certain rapport with the demon an observer can, at least in some respect or other, use almost anyone as an example.  In this respect Shakespeare is and will always remain a hero.  That horrid demon, the most demonic figure Shakespeare ever portrayed, and did so incomparably, Gloucester (later Richard III), what made him a demon? Obviously that he could not endure the pity that had been piled on him from childhood.  His monologue in the first act of King Richard III is worth more than all moral systems, none of which bears a hint of the terrors of existence and of their nature.  I, that am rudely stamped, and want love’s majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time Into this breathing world scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them ...  Natures like Gloucester’s cannot be saved by mediating them into an idea of society.  Ethics really only makes fun of them, just as it would make a mockery of Sarah if it were to say to her, ‘Why don’t you express the universal and get married?’ Such natures are aboriginally in the paradox, and they are by no means less perfect than others; it is only that they are either damned in the demonic paradox or delivered in the divine.  Now people have been pleased to think from time immemorial that witches, gnomes, trolls, etc.  are misshapen creatures, and it is undeniable that we all have a tendency when we see a misshapen person directly to link this idea with that of moral perversion.  But what colossal injustice! It should really be the other way around.  It is life itself that has corrupted them, as a stepmother makes degenerates of her stepchildren.  To be put outside the universal from the start, by nature or by historical circumstance, that is the beginning of the demonic, and the individual can hardly be blamed for that.  So Cumberland’s Jew is also a demon notwithstanding his beneficence.  Thus the demonic can also express itself in contempt for men, a contempt which it should nevertheless be noted does not make the demonic person himself act contemptuously; on the contrary his strength is his knowledge that he is better than all who pass judgement on him.  — On all such matters the poets should be the first to make a stir.  God knows what books our young versifiers are reading these days! Their studies are no doubt confined to learning rhymes by rote.  Heaven knows what importance they have in life! Just now I couldn’t honestly tell you whether they are good for anything but to give us edifying proof of the immortality of the soul, to the extent at least that one can safely say of them what Baggesen says of the city’s poet, Kildevalle: ‘if he is immortal then we all are’.  - What has been said here about Sarah, almost in the style of a poetic production, appealing therefore in effect only to the imagination, finds its full significance if out of psychological interest one probes the meaning of the old saying: ‘ nullum unquam exstitit magnum ingenium sine aliqua dementia’ ‘there was never great genius without some madness’.  For the dementia here is the genius’s suffering in life, is the expression, if I may say so, of divine jealousy, while genius itself is the mark of divine favour.  Thus the genius is disorientated from the start in relation to the universal and put into relation to the paradox, whether, in despair over his own limitation, which in his own eyes turns his omnipotence into impotence, he seeks a demonic reassurance and therefore will not admit the limitation to either God or man, or he reassures himself religiously in love for the divine.  There are psychological topics here to which it seems to me one could happily devote a lifetime, and yet we so rarely hear a word about them.  How is madness related to genius? Can the one be constructed out of the other? In what sense and to what extent is the genius master of his own madness? For it goes without saying that to some degree he is indeed its master, otherwise he would really be mad.  Performing such observations requires, however, a high order of ingenuity as well as love, since performing observations on people of superior talent is extremely difficult.  If one bears this in mind in reading some of those authors most celebrated for their genius, it is conceivable that one might just, once in a while, though only with great effort, find out something.  I would like to consider one more case of an individual wanting to save the universal by his concealment and silence.  I shall take the legend of Faust.  Faust is a doubter, 13 an apostate of the spirit who goes the way of the flesh.  This is how the poets see it, and although it is repeated over and over again that every age has its Faust, poets still doggedly follow one another down this same beaten path.  Let us make a slight change.  Faust is a doubter kat‘eksochen in an eminent sense; but he has a sympathetic nature.  Even in Goethe’s understanding of Faust I miss a deeper psychological insight into the secret conversations which doubt has with itself.  Nowadays, when indeed all have experienced doubt, no poet has as yet made a move in this direction.  I could think of offering them Royal Securities to write on, to put down ‘all’ they have experienced in this regard - for it is unlikely that what they have to say will take more than the left-hand margin.  Only when one turns Faust back in on himself in this way — only then can the doubt appear poetically, only then does he himself genuinely discover in reality all its sufferings.  Then he knows it is spirit that sustains life, but he also knows that the security and happiness people live in are not supported by the power of spirit but can be readily explained as unreflective bliss.  As a doubter, as the doubter, he is above all that, and if someone wants to deceive him into supposing that he had put doubt behind him, he easily sees through that.  One who has made a movement in the world of spirit, hence an infinite movement, can tell at once from the spoken line whether the speaker is a man of experience or a Münchhausen.  What a Tamerlane could do with his Huns, Faust knows he can do with his doubt - frighten people out of their wits, make the very world shake under their feet, send people scattering in every direction, and cause the cry of alarm to sound from every quarter.  And if he does that he is still not a Tamerlane, for having the warrant of thought he is in a sense authorized to act in this way.  But Faust has a sympathetic nature, he loves life, his soul knows no envy, he sees he would be unable to prevent the landslide that would no doubt be set in motion, he has no wish for Herostratic honour — he remains silent, he hides his doubt in his soul more assiduously than the girl the fruit of her sinful love beneath her heart, he tries as well as he can to walk in step with others, but as far as what goes on inside him, that he consumes internally and in this way he makes himself a sacrifice to the universal.  Sometimes, when some eccentric raises the whirlwind of doubt, one hears the complaint: ‘If only he had kept quiet.’ Faust too represents this notion.  Anyone with any idea of what it means to live on spirit knows also what the hunger of doubt means, and that the doubter hungers just as much for the daily bread of life as for the sustenance of spirit.  Even though all the pain Faust suffers can be a fairly good argument for its not being pride that possesses him, I shall nevertheless avail myself of a small precautionary device which is easy enough for me to come by, who, just as Gregory of Rimini was called tortor infantium because he subscribed to the damnation of infants, might be tempted to call myself tortor heroum - I am very inventive when it comes to torturing heroes.  Faust sees Marguerite - not after he has chosen the life of pleasure, since my Faust doesn’t choose pleasure at all - he sees Marguerite not in Mephistopheles’s concave mirror but in all her lovable innocence, and because his soul has preserved its love for humankind he can also very well fall in love with her.  But he is a doubter, his doubt has destroyed reality for him.  So ideal is my Faust that he is not one of those scientific doubters who doubt for an hour every term at the lectern but can otherwise do anything, as indeed they do without the help of spirit or on its strength.  He is a doubter, and the doubter hungers as much for his daily slice of joy as for the nourishment of spirit.  But still he stays true to his decision, is silent, and talks to no one of his doubt, nor to Marguerite of his love.  It goes without saying that Faust is too ideal a figure to be satisfied with the tattle that if he spoke he would only set a more general discussion in motion, or that the whole affair would blow over without consequences, or perhaps this or perhaps that.  (Here, as will be obvious to any poet, lies the dormant comedy in our scenario, bringing Faust into ironical relation to those slapstick fools who nowadays chase after doubt, produce an external argument, e.g.  a doctor’s certificate, to show that they have really doubted, or take an oath that they have doubted everything, or else prove it by the fact that on their journey they met up with a doubter — those express couriers and sprint-experts in the world of spirit who in all haste gather a little hint of doubt from this person and a little hint of faith from that, and then wirtschafte do business as best they may depending on whether the congregation wants fine sand or coarse sand.) Faust is too ideal a figure to walk about in slippers.  No one who lacks an infinite passion is ideal and anyone who does have an infinite passion has long since saved his soul from such rubbish.  He is silent so as to offer himself - or else he talks, well knowing that he will put everything into confusion.  He is silent, so ethics condemns him.  It says: ‘You must acknowledge the universal, and you do that by speaking, and you dare not take pity on the universal.’ This is something one should not forget when one sometimes judges a doubter severely for speaking.  I myself am not inclined to judge such conduct leniently, but here as everywhere it is a question of the movements occurring properly.  If things go wrong, then a doubter, even if by speaking he should bring all manner of misfortune upon the world, would still be far preferable to these miserable sweet-tooths who try a taste of everything and would cure doubt without being acquainted with it, and are therefore as a rule the immediate cause of outbreaks of ungoverned and unmanageable doubt.  - If he speaks he confuses everything, for if nothing happens he only finds that out afterwards, and the consequence can be of no help either in the moment of acting or in questions of responsibility.  If he is silent on his own responsibility, he may indeed be acting magnanimously, but to his other pains there is added a little temptation.  The universal will be forever plaguing him and saying, ‘You should have spoken, how can you be certain that it wasn’t after all some hidden pride that prompted your decision?’ If on the other hand the doubter can be the single individual who as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute, then he receives authorization for his silence.  But then he must make guilt of his doubt.  But then he is in the paradox.  But then his doubt is cured, even though he can acquire another.  Even the New Testament would approve such a silence.  There are passages in the New Testament even extolling irony, so long as it is the better side that it is used to conceal.  However, this movement is just as much a movement of irony as any other movement based on subjectivity’s being higher than reality.  This is something no one nowadays wants to know; generally people want to know no more about irony than Hegel has said about it, though curiously enough he had rather little understanding of it and indeed bore a grudge against it which our age finds good reason not to give up, seeing that for it irony is simply something it must guard itself against.  The Sermon on the Mount says: ‘But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto men to fast.’ The passage gives clear testimony to subjectivity’s incommensurability with reality, indeed even to its having the right to deceive.  If only those people who wander about these days with vague talk of the idea of the congregation would read the New Testament, they might come upon other ideas.  But now Abraham.  How did he act? For I have not forgotten, and the reader may now be pleased to recall, that this was the point to which the whole preceding discussion was intended to lead.  Not to make Abraham more intelligible thereby, but in order that his unintelligibility might be seen more in the round, for, as I have said, I cannot understand Abraham, I can only admire him.  It was also mentioned that none of the stages described contained an analogue of Abraham, they were elaborated only so as to indicate, from the point of view of their own sphere, the boundary of the unknown land by the points of discrepancy.  If there should be any question of an analogy here it would have to be the paradox of sin, but that again belongs to another sphere and cannot explain Abraham, and is itself far easier to explain than Abraham.  So Abraham did not speak.  He spoke neither to Sarah, to Eleazar, nor to Isaac.  He passed over these three ethical authorities.  Because for Abraham the ethical had no higher expression than that of family life.  Aesthetics allowed, in fact demanded, silence of the individual when by remaining silent he could save another.  This is already enough to show that Abraham does not lie within the circumference of aesthetics.  His silence is not at all to save Isaac, as in general the whole task of sacrificing Isaac for his own and God’s sake is an outrage aesthetically.  Aesthetics can well understand that I sacrifice myself, but not that I should sacrifice another for my own sake.  The aesthetic hero was silent.  Ethics condemned him, however, because it was on the strength of his accidental particularity that he remained silent.  His human prescience was what determined that he should be silent.  This ethics cannot forgive.  All such human insight is only an illusion.  Ethics demands an infinite movement which requires disclosure.  So the aesthetic hero can indeed speak but will not.  The genuine tragic hero sacrifices himself and everything he has for the universal; his action, every emotion in him belongs to the universal, he is revealed, and in this disclosure he is the beloved son of ethics.  This does not apply to Abraham.  He does nothing for the universal and he is concealed.  We are now at the paradox.  Either the individual as the particular can stand in an absolute relation to the absolute, and then the ethical is not the highest, or Abraham is done for, he is neither a tragic hero nor an aesthetic hero.  Here again the paradox might seem the easiest and most convenient thing of all.  However, I must repeat that anyone who remains convinced of that is not the knight of faith, for distress and anguish are the only justification conceivable, even though they cannot be conceived in general, for if they could the paradox would be cancelled.  Abraham is silent — but he cannot speak, therein lies the distress and anguish.  For if when I speak I cannot make myself understood, I do not speak even if I keep talking without stop day and night.  This is the case with Abraham.  He can say what he will, but there is one thing he cannot say and since he cannot say it, i.e.  say it in a way that another understands it, he does not speak.  The relief of speech is that it translates me into the universal.  Now Abraham can say the most beautiful things any language can muster about how he loves Isaac.  But this is not what he has in mind, that being the deeper thought that he would have to sacrifice Isaac because it was a trial.  This no one can understand, and so no one can but misunderstand the former.  Of this distress the tragic hero knows nothing.  In the first place he has the consolation that all counter-arguments have been done justice to, that he has been able to give Clytemnestra, Iphigenia, Achilles, the Chorus, every living being, every voice from the heart of humankind, every intelligent, every anxious, every accusing, every compassionate thought an opportunity to stand up against him.  He can be sure that all that it is possible to say against him has been said, unsparingly, mercilessly - and to contend with the whole world is a comfort, but to contend with oneself dreadful.  - He need have no fear of having overlooked something, of later having to cry out like King Edward IV at the news of the death of Clarence: Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath, Kneeled at my feet and bid me be advised? Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love? The tragic hero knows nothing of the terrible responsibility of solitude.  Moreover, he has the comfort of being able to weep and wail with Clytemnestra and Iphigenia - and sobbing and crying give relief, while groans that cannot be uttered are torture.  Agamemnon can rally himself quickly to the certainty that he will act, and he therefore still has time to bring comfort and courage.  This Abraham cannot do.  When his heart is stirred, when his words would convey a blessed consolation for the whole world, he dare not console, for would not Sarah, would not Eleazar, would not Isaac say to him, ‘Why do you want to do this, you can after all refrain’? And if in his distress he should want to unburden his feelings and embrace everything dear to him before taking the final step, then this might have the most frightful consequence that Sarah, that Eleazar, that Isaac would be offended in him and believe him a hypocrite.  Talk he cannot, he speaks no human language.  Though he himself understood all the tongues of the world, though the loved ones understood them too — he still could not talk - he speaks a divine tongue - he ‘speaks with tongues’.  This distress I can well understand.  I can admire Abraham.  I have no fear that anyone should be tempted by this story to want irresponsibly to be the single individual.  But I also confess that I myself lack the courage for that, and that I would gladly renounce any prospect of coming further if only it were possible for me to come that far, however late in the day.  Abraham can refrain at any moment, he can repent the whole thing as a temptation.  Then he can speak, then all will understand him — but then he is no longer Abraham.  Abraham cannot speak.  What would explain everything, that it is a trial - though note, one in which the ethical is the temptation - is something he cannot say (i.e.  in a way that can be understood).  Anyone so placed is an emigrant from the sphere of the universal.  And yet what comes next he is even less able to say.  For, as was made sufficiently clear earlier, Abraham makes two movements.  He makes the infinite movement of resignation and gives up his claim to Isaac, something no one can understand because it is a private undertaking.  But then he further makes, and at every moment is making, the movement of faith.  This is his comfort.  For he says, ‘Nevertheless it won’t happen, or if it does the Lord will give me a new Isaac on the strength of the absurd.’ The tragic hero does at least get to the end of the story.  Iphigenia bows to her father’s decision, she herself makes the infinite movement of resignation and they now understand one another.  She is able to understand Agamemnon because his undertaking expresses the universal.  If on the other hand Agamemnon were to say to her, ‘Even though the deity demands you as a sacrifice, it’s still possible that he didn’t — on the strength of the absurd’, he would instantly become unintelligible to her.  If he could say it on the strength of human calculation, then Iphigenia would surely understand him.  But that would mean that Agamemnon had not made the infinite movement of resignation, and then he would not be a hero, and then the seer’s utterance is just a traveller’s tale and the whole incident a piece of vaudeville.  So Abraham did not speak.  Only one word of his has been preserved, his only reply to Isaac, which we can take to be sufficient evidence that he had not spoken previously.  Isaac asks Abraham where the lamb is for the burnt offering.  ‘And Abraham said: My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.’ This last word of Abraham’s I shall consider here a little more closely.  If it had not occurred the whole incident would lack something.  If it had been a different word everything might dissolve in confusion.  I have often pondered on how far a tragic hero, whether suffering or action provides the consummation of his heroism, ought to have a final remark.  So far as I can see it depends on what sphere of life he belongs to, on the extent to which his life has intellectual significance, on how far his suffering or action stand in relation to spirit.  It goes without saying that at the moment of consummation the tragic hero, like anyone else, is capable of a few words, even a few appropriate words.  But the question is whether it is appropriate for him to say them.  If the significance of his life consists in an outward act, then he has nothing to say, since everything he says is essentially idle chat which can only weaken the impact he makes, while the rites of tragedy require on the contrary that he fulfil his task in silence, whether in action or suffering.  So as not to go too far afield I shall simply draw on our nearest example.  If Agamemnon himself, and not Calchas the seer, had had to draw the knife on Iphigenia he would only have demeaned himself by wanting to say a few words at the last moment.  Everyone knew the significance of his deed, the whole process of piety, pity, feeling, and tears was done with, and besides, his life had no relation to spirit, i.e.  he was not a teacher or a witness to the spirit.  If on the other hand the significance of the hero’s life tends towards spirit, the lack of a remark will weaken the impact he makes.  It is not something appropriate he should be saying, not some bit of rhetoric, but something that will convey that he is consummating himself in the decisive moment.  An intellectual tragic hero of this kind should allow himself what people often aspire to frivolously, namely having and keeping the last word.  We expect of him the same exalted bearing as becomes any tragic hero, but on top of that we expect some word.  So if an intellectual tragic hero consummates his heroism in suffering (in death), in this final word he will become immortal before he dies, while the ordinary tragic hero only becomes immortal after his death.  Socrates can be used as an example.  He was an intellectual tragic hero.  He hears his death-sentence.  That instant he dies.  Unless you grasp that it requires all the strength of spirit to die, that the hero always dies before his death, you will not come particularly far in your observations on life.  So as a hero Socrates is required to stay calm and at ease, but as an intellectual hero he is required to have sufficient spiritual strength at the final moment to fulfil himself.  So he cannot, like the ordinary tragic hero, concentrate on keeping himself face to face with death; he has to make this latter movement so quickly that in the same instant he is consciously above that conflict and continues to assert himself.  Had Socrates been silent in the crisis of death he would have weakened the effect of his life, aroused a suspicion that the resilience of irony was not, in him, a primitive strength, but only a game whose flexibility he had to exploit in the decisive moment, according to an opposite standard, pathetically to sustain himself.  14 What I have been briefly hinting at here doesn’t really apply to Abraham, to the extent that one supposes one might find by analogy some appropriate word for Abraham; but it applies to the extent that one sees the necessity of Abraham’s fulfilling himself at the final moment not by drawing the knife silently but by having something to say, seeing that as the father of faith he has absolute significance in terms of spirit.  As to what he is to say, I can form no idea in advance.  Once he has said it I can no doubt understand it, even in a sense understand Abraham in what is said, yet without thereby coming any nearer him than in the foregoing.  If we’d had no remark from Socrates I could have put myself into his position and made one, and if I couldn’t do that myself, a poet would have managed.  But no poet can reach Abraham.  Before going on to consider Abraham’s last word more closely, I must first draw attention to the difficulty of Abraham’s coming to say anything at all.  The distress and anguish in the paradox consisted, as explained above, precisely in the silence; Abraham cannot speak.  15 To that extent then it is self-contradictory to demand that he should speak, unless one wants him out of the paradox again, so that in the decisive moment he suspends it, whereby he ceases to be Abraham and brings to naught all that went before.  Were Abraham, at the decisive moment, to say to Isaac, ‘It is you who are to be sacrificed’, this would only be a weakness.  For if he could speak at all he should have done so long before, and the weakness then consists in his not having the maturity of spirit and concentration to imagine the whole of the pain beforehand but having pushed some of it aside so that the actual pain proves greater than the imagined one.  Besides, with talk of this kind he would fall out of the paradox, and if he really wanted to talk to Isaac he would have to transform his own situation into that of a temptation.  Otherwise, after all, he could say nothing and if he does so transform his situation he isn’t even a tragic hero.  Nevertheless a last word of Abraham’s has been preserved, and so far as I can understand the paradox I can also understand Abraham’s total presence in that word.  First and foremost he doesn’t say anything, and that is his way of saying what he has to say.  His answer to Isaac has the form of irony, for it is always irony to say something and yet not say it.  Isaac asks Abraham because he assumes Abraham knows.  Now if Abraham had replied, ‘I know nothing’, he would have uttered an untruth.  He cannot say anything, since what he knows he cannot say.  So he replies, ‘My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.’ Here one sees the double movement in Abraham’s soul, as it has been described in the foregoing.  Had Abraham simply renounced his claim to Isaac and done no more, he would have uttered an untruth.  He knows that God demands the sacrifice of Isaac, and he knows that precisely at this moment he himself is ready to sacrifice him.  So, after having made this movement Abraham has at every instant been performing the next, making the movement on the strength of the absurd.  To that extent he utters no untruth, for on the strength of the absurd it is after all possible that God might do something quite different.  He utters no untruth then, but neither does he say anything, for he speaks in a foreign tongue.  This becomes still more obvious when we consider that it was Abraham himself who was to sacrifice Isaac.  If the task had been a different one, if the Lord had commanded Abraham to take Isaac out on the mountain in Moriah, and then let his own lightning strike Isaac and take him as a sacrifice in that way, Abraham would in a straightforward sense be right to talk as enigmatically as he did, for in that case he himself could not have known what would happen.  But as the task is given to Abraham, it is he who must act, so he must know at the decisive moment what he is about to do, and accordingly must know that Isaac is to be sacrificed.  If he doesn’t definitely know that, he hasn’t made the infinite movement of resignation, in which case his words are not indeed untrue, but then at the same time he is very far from being Abraham, he is less significant than a tragic hero, he is in fact an irresolute man who can resolve to do neither one thing nor the other, and who will therefore always come to talk in riddles.  But such a Haesitator waverer is simply a parody of the knight of faith.  Here too it can appear that one can understand Abraham, but only as one understands the paradox.  For my part I can in a way understand Abraham, but I see very well that I lack the courage to speak in this way, as much as I lack the courage to act like Abraham.  But I do not at all say that what he did is inconsiderable on that account, since on the contrary it is the one and only marvel.  And what did contemporaries think of the tragic hero? That he was great, and they looked up to him.  And that noble assembly of worthies, the jury that every generation appoints to pass judgement on its predecessor, came to the same verdict.  But none could understand Abraham.  And yet think what he achieved! To remain true to his love.  But he who loves God has no need of tears, needs no admiration, and forgets his suffering in love, indeed forgets so completely that afterwards not the least hint of his pain would remain were God himself not to remember it; for God sees in secret and knows the distress and counts the tears and forgets nothing.  So either there is a paradox, that the single individual as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute, or Abraham is done for.  Discover your next great read! PRHstyle.css What’s next on your reading list? Discover your next great read! Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.  Sign up now.  The Ethics of Ambiguity CONCLUSION Is this kind of ethics individualistic or not? Yes, if one means by that that it accords to the individual an absolute value and that it recognizes in him alone the power of laying the foundations of his own existence.  It is individualism in the sense in which the wisdom of the ancients, the Christian ethics of salvation, and the Kantian ideal of virtue also merit this name; it is opposed to the totalitarian doctrines which raise up beyond man the mirage of Mankind.  But it is not solipsistic, since the individual is defined only by his relationship to the world and to other individuals; he exists only by transcending himself, and his freedom can be achieved only through the freedom of others.  He justifies his existence by a movement which, like freedom, springs from his heart but which leads outside of him.  This individualism does not lead to the anarchy of personal whim.  Man is free; but he finds his law in his very freedom.  First, he must assume his freedom and not flee it; he assumes it by a constructive movement: one does not exist without doing something; and also by a negative movement which rejects oppression for oneself and others.  In construction, as in rejection, it is a matter of reconquering freedom on the contingent facticity of existence, that is, of taking the given, which, at the start, is there without any reason, as something willed by man.  A conquest of this kind is never finished; the contingency remains, and, so that he may assert his will, man is even obliged to stir up in the world the outrage he does not want.  But this element of failure is a very condition of his life; one can never dream of eliminating it without immediately dreaming of death.  This does not mean that one should consent to failure, but rather one must consent to struggle against it without respite.  Yet, isn’t this battle without victory pure gullibility? It will be argued that this is only a ruse of transcendance projecting before itself a goal which constantly recedes, running after itself on an endless treadmill; to exist for Mankind is to remain where one is, and it fools itself by calling this turbulent stagnation progress; our whole ethics does nothing but encourage it in this lying enterprise since we are asking each one to confirm existence as a value for all others; isn’t it simply a matter of organizing among men a complicity which allows them to substitute a game of illusions for the given world? We have already attempted to answer mis objection.  One can formulate it only by placing himself on the grounds of an inhuman and consequently false objectivity; within Mankind men may be fooled; the word “lie” has a meaning by opposition to the truth established by men themselves, but Mankind can not fool itself completely since it is precisely Mankind which creates the criteria of true and false.  In Plato, art is mystification because there is the heaven of Ideas; but in the earthly domain all glorification of the earth is true as soon as it is realized.  Let men attach value to words, forms, colors, mathematical theorems, physical laws, and athletic prowess; let them accord value to one another in love and friendship, and the objects, the events, and the men immediately have this value; they have it absolutely.  It is possible that a man may refuse to love anything on earth; he will prove this refusal and he will carry it out by suicide.  If he lives, the reason is that, whatever he may say, there still remains in him some attachment to existence; his life will be commensurate with this attachment; it will justify itself to the extent that it genuinely justifies the world.  This justification, though open upon the entire universe through time and space, will always be finite.  Whatever one may do, one never realizes anything but a limited work, like existence itself which tries to establish itself through that work and which death also limits.  It is the assertion of our finiteness which doubtless gives the doctrine which we have just evoked its austerity and, in some eyes, its sadness.  As soon as one considers a system abstractly and theoretically, one puts himself, in effect, on the plane of the universal, thus, of the infinite.  That is why reading the Hegelian system is so comforting.  I remember having experienced a great feeling of calm on reading Hegel in the impersonal framework of the Bibliotheque Nationale in August 1940.  But once I got into the street again, into my life, out of the system, beneath a real sky, the system was no longer of any use to me: what it had offered me, under a show of the infinite, was the consolations of death; and I again wanted to live in the midst of living men.  I think that, inversely, existentialism does not offer to the reader the consolations of an abstract evasion: existentialism proposes no evasion.  On the contrary, its ethics is experienced in the truth of life, and it then appears as the only proposition of salvation which one can address to men.  Taking on its own account Descartes’ revolt against the evil genius, the pride of the thinking reed in the face of the universe which crushes him, it asserts that, despite his limits, through them, it is up to each one to fulfill his existence as an absolute.  Regardless of the staggering dimensions of the world about us, the density of our ignorance, the risks of catastrophes to come, and our individual weakness within the immense collectivity, the fact remains that we are absolutely free today if we choose to will our existence in its finiteness, a finiteness which is open on the infinite.  And in fact, any man who has known real loves, real revolts, real desires, and real will knows quite well that he has no need of any outside guarantee to be sure of his goals; their certitude comes from his own drive.  There is a very old saying which goes: “Do what you must, come what may.” That amounts to saying in a different way that the result is not external to the good will which fulfills itself in aiming at it.  If it came to be that each man did what he must, existence would be saved in each one without there being any need of dreaming of a paradise where all would be reconciled in death.  The Ethics of Ambiguity All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.  By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook onscreen.  No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.  copyright © 1948, Philosophical Library, Inc.  cover design by Angela Goddard This 2011 edition distributed by Open Road Integrated Media 180 Varick Street New York, NY 10014 The Ethics of Ambiguity INDEX Abraham, 133 Adventurer, the 58-62 , 63 Alencon point, 94 Alexandria, 76 Algeria, 101 Ambiguity, 57 , 58 , 68 , 129 , 139 , 142 , 152-154 America, 68 , 90 Anti-fascism, 154 Arabs, the, 101 Aragon, 132 Arrivisme, 59 Athens, 75 , 76 Atom, 25 Barres, 132 Bataille Georges, 70 , 126 Baudelaire, 53 Bolshevism, 45 Breton, 55 British Empire, the 98 Buchenwald, 9 , 74 , 101 Bukharin, 146 Byzantium, 75 Carolinas, the 85 Catholic Church, 132 Catholics, the 50 Cezanne, 129 Childhood, 141 , 142 Claudel, 138 Cleopatra, 147 Coimbre, 93 Comte, 116 Cortez, 59 Crevel, 54 Christ, 56 Christian charity, 135 Christian Church, 48 Christian myth, 71 Coliseum, 75 Communist Party, 48 Cromwell, 147 Dachau, 101 Descartes, 28 , 35 , 105 , 159 Don Juan, 60 , 61 Dos Passos John, 151 Dostoievsky, 15 Driev la Rochelle, 56 , 67 Egoism, 70 Elvira, 60 , 61 England, 124 Epicurean cult, 135 Ethics, 23 , 32-34 , 55 , 59 , 95 , 126 , 129 , 131 , 134 , 154 , 156 Ethics of autonomy, 33 Existentialism, 10 , 18 , 34 , 59 , 72 , 78 , 153 , 159 Fanaticism, 66 Fascism, 45 , 62 , 138 , 154 Fichte, 17 Florence, 76 France, 132 , 140 French, the 139 French Union, the 140 Future, the 115 , 116 , 118-120 , 123 , 124 , 126-128 , 130-132 , 136 , 144 Germany, 150 Germans, the 76 , 126 Gilles, 56 Giotto, 129 Girondists, the 149 Goering, 42 Goethe, 132 Greece, 124 Hegel, 8-10 , 17 , 18 , 22 , 46 , 62 , 69 , 70 , 84 , 103-105 , 112 , 116 , 117 , 122 , 153 , 158 Hegelian ethics, 104 Heidegger, 102 , 116 Hitler, 98 Hitlerians, the 103 Humanism, 21 Humanists, the 92 Husserl, 14 Hysteria, 26 Ibsen, 143 India, 150 Indians, the 60 , 61 Individualism, 156 Intelligence, 41 Isaac, 133 Italians, the 75 Italy, 31 , 61 Jew, the 103 , 144 Jouhandeau, 53 Kant, 17 , 18 , 22 , 33 , 69 , 105 , 138 Kantian moralism, 135 Kantianism, 144 Kantism, 33 Kierkegaard, 9 , 46 , 133 Koestler, 110 , 132 Korai of Athens, 130 Lawrence, 61 Lenin, 22 , 23 Lespinasse, Mademoiselle de, 66 Lyons, 150 Malaparte, 153 Marx, 18 , 20 , 21 , 84 , 85 , 87 , 118 Marxism, 18-20 Materialism, 20 Mathematics, 79 Marseilles, 92 Maurras, 85 Metaphysics, 34 Middle Ages, the 92 Montaigne, 7 Moralism, 21 Moscow trials, 146 Mythomaniac, the 47 Nazis, the 95 , 101 , 153 Nazism, 56 Nietzsche, 46 , 72 Nihilism, 64 , 56 , 58 , 65 , 68 , 100 Nihilist, the 52 , 55 , 57 , 61 Nirvana, 8 Nuremberg, 42 Obidos, 93 Palestine, 124 Paris, 76 , 125 , 150 Passion, 64 , 66 , 72 Passionate man, the 63 , 64 , 66 Paternalism, 138 Philosophy, 46 Physics, 79 Pierrefeu, 129 Pizarro, 61 Plato, 33 , 80 , 157 Pompeii, 92 Ponge, 88 , 115 Portugal, 93 Proust, 50 P.  R.  L.  (Parti Republicain de’la Liberté) 90 Protestantism, 133 Rauschning, 56 Realism, 21 Reformation, the 133 Renaissance, the 93 Revolution, 15 , 46 , 49 Robespierre, 149 Rome, 75 Roque dela, Colonel 153 Rousseau, 141 , 142 Rousset David, 114 Russia, 68 , 125 , 146 Saint-Just, 108 , 111 , 149 Salazar, 93 Sartre, 10-12 , 24 , 53 , 122 Scepticism, 58 , 59 Science, 46 Serious man, the 45-62 , 64 Sickness, 45 Signification, 31 , 41 , 71 Socialism, 154 Socrates, 33 Spain, 124 , 144 Spaniard, the 144 Sparta, 76 Spartacus, 132 Spinoza, 33 Spontaneity, 26 , 41 Stalingrad, 91 , 146 Stalinists, the 125 Steinbeck, 150-152 Stoicism, 81 Stoics, the 29 , 144 Subman, the 43-47 , 53 , 55 Surrealism, 54 Syracuse, 75 Technics, 79 , 80 Titian, 129 Tristan Flora, 86 Trotsky, 119 Tyrant, the 62 , 71 United States, 161 Universe, the 121 U.S.S.R., 145 Vache, 54 Valery, 121 Van Gogh, 29 Vichyites, the 131 Vigilantes of America, 60 War, 45 Wright Richard, 89 Yankees, the 90 The Ethics of Ambiguity “Life in itself is neither good nor evil, it is the place of good and evil, according to what you make it.” —Montaigne.  I “T HE continous work of our life,” says Montaigne, “is to build death.” He quotes the Latin poets: Prima, quae vitam dedit, hora corpsit.  And again: Nascentes morimur.  Man knows and thinks this tragic ambivalence which the animal and the plant merely undergo.  A new paradox is thereby introduced into his destiny.  “Rational animal,” “thinking reed,” he escapes from his natural condition without, however, freeing himself from it.  He is still a part of this world of which he is a consciousness.  He asserts himself as a pure internality against which no external power can take hold, and he also experiences himself as a thing crushed by the dark weight of other things.  At every moment he can grasp the non-temporal truth of his existence.  But between the past which no longer is and the future which is not yet, this moment when he exists is nothing.  This privilege, which he alone possesses, of being a sovereign and unique subject amidst a universe of objects, is what he shares with all his fellow-men.  In turn an object for others, he is nothing more than an individual in the collectivity on which he depends.  As long as there have been men and they have lived, they have all felt this tragic ambiguity of their condition, but as long as there have been philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it.  They have striven to reduce mind to matter, or to reabsorb matter into mind, or to merge them within a single substance.  Those who have accepted the dualism have established a hierarchy between body and soul which permits of considering as negligible the part of the self which cannot be saved.  They have denied death, either by integrating it with life or by promising to man immortality.  Or, again they have denied life, considering it as a veil of illusion beneath which is hidden the truth of Nirvana.  And the ethics which they have proposed to their disciples has always pursued the same goal.  It has been a matter of eliminating the ambiguity by making oneself pure inwardness or pure externality, by escaping from the sensible world or by being engulfed in it, by yielding to eternity or enclosing oneself in the pure moment.  Hegel, with more ingenuity, tried to reject none of the aspects of man’s condition and to reconcile them all.  According to his system, the moment is preserved in the development of time; Nature asserts itself in the face of Spirit which denies it while assuming it; the individual is again found in the collectivity within which he is lost; and each man’s death is fulfilled by being canceled out into the Life of Mankind.  One can thus repose in a marvelous optimism where even the bloody wars simply express the fertile restlessness of the Spirit.  At the present time there still exist many doctrines which choose to leave in the shadow certain troubling aspects of a too complex situation.  But their attempt to lie to us is in vain.  Cowardice doesn’t pay.  Those reasonable metaphysics, those consoling ethics with which they would like to entice us only accentuate the disorder from which we suffer.  Men of today seem to feel more acutely than ever the paradox of their condition.  They know themselves to be the supreme end to which all action should be subordinated, but the exigencies of action force them to treat one another as instruments or obstacles, as means.  The more widespread their mastery of the world, the more they find themselves crushed by uncontrollable forces.  Though they are masters of the atomic bomb, yet it is created only to destroy them.  Each one has the incomparable taste in his mouth of his own life, and yet each feels himself more insignificant than an insect within the immense collectivity whose limits are one with the earth’s.  Perhaps in no other age have they manifested their grandeur more brilliantly, and in no other age has this grandeur been so horribly flouted.  In spite of so many stubborn lies, at every moment, at every opportunity, the truth comes to light, the truth of life and death, of my solitude and my bond with the world, of my freedom and my servitude, of the insignificance and the sovereign importance of each man and all men.  There was Stalingrad and there was Buchenwald, and neither of the two wipes out the other.  Since we do not succeed in fleeing it, let us therefore try to look the truth in the face.  Let us try to assume our fundamental ambiguity.  It is in the knowledge of the genuine conditions of our life that we must draw our strength to live and our reason for acting.  From the very beginning, existentialism defined itself as a philosophy of ambiguity.  It was by affirming the irreducible character of ambiguity that Kierkegaard opposed himself to Hegel, and it is by ambiguity that, in our own generation, Sartre, in Being and Nothingness, fundamentally defined man, that being whose being is not to be, that subjectivity which realizes itself only as a presence in the world, that engaged freedom, that surging of the for-oneself which is immediately given for others.  But it is also claimed that existentialism is a philosophy of the absurd and of despair.  It encloses man in a sterile anguish, in an empty subjectivity.  It is incapable of furnishing him with any principle for making choices.  Let him do as he pleases.  In any case, the game is lost.  Does not Sartre declare, in effect, that man is a “useless passion,” that he tries in vain to realize the synthesis of the for-oneself and the in-oneself, to make himself God? It is true.  But it is also true that the most optimistic ethics have all begun by emphasizing the element of failure involved in the condition of man; without failure, no ethics; for a being who, from the very start, would be an exact co-incidence with himself, in a perfect plenitude, the notion of having-to-be would have no meaning.  One does not offer an ethics to a God.  It is impossible to propose any to man if one defines him as nature, as something given.  The so-called psychological or empirical ethics manage to establish themselves only by introducing surreptitiously some flaw within the manthing which they have first defined.  Hegel tells us in the last part of The Phenomenology of Mind that moral consciousness can exist only to the extent that there is disagreement between nature and morality.  It would disappear if the ethical law became the natural law.  To such an extent that by a paradoxical “displacement,” if moral action is the absolute goal, the absolute goal is also that moral action may not be present.  This means that there can be a having-to-be only for a being who, according to the existentialist definition, questions himself in his being, a being who is at a distance from himself and who has to be his being.  Well and good.  But it is still necessary for the failure to be surmounted, and existentialist ontology does not allow this hope.  Man’s passion is useless; he has no means for becoming the being that he is not.  That too is true.  And it is also true that in Being and Nothingness Sartre has insisted above all on the abortive aspect of the human adventure.  It is only in the last pages that he opens up the perspective for an ethics.  However, if we reflect upon his descriptions of existence, we perceive that they are far from condemning man without recourse.  The failure described in Being and Nothingness is definitive, but it is also ambiguous.  Man, Sartre tells us, is “a being who makes himself a lack of being in order that there might be being.” That means, first of all, that his passion is not inflicted upon him from without.  He chooses it.  It is his very being and, as such, does not imply the idea of unhappiness.  If this choice is considered as useless, it is because there exists no absolute value before the passion of man, outside of it, in relation to which one might distinguish the useless from the useful.  The word “useful” has not yet received a meaning on the level of description where Being and Nothingness is situated.  It can be defined only in the human world established by man’s projects and the ends he sets up.  In the original helplessness from which man surges up, nothing is useful, nothing is useless.  It must therefore be understood that the passion to which man has acquiesced finds no external justification.  No outside appeal, no objective necessity permits of its being called useful.  It has no reason to will itself.  But this does not mean that it can not justify itself, that it can not give itself reasons for being that it does not have.  And indeed Sartre tells us that man makes himself this lack of being in order that there might be being.  The term in order that clearly indicates an intentionality.  It is not in vain that man nullifies being.  Thanks to him, being is disclosed and he desires this disclosure.  There is an original type of attachment to being which is not the relationship “wanting to be” but rather “wanting to disclose being.” Now, here there is not failure, but rather success.  This end, which man proposes to himself by making himself lack of being, is, in effect, realized by him.  By uprooting himself from the world, man makes himself present to the world and makes the world present to him.  I should like to be the landscape which I am contemplating, I should like this sky, this quiet water to think themselves within me, that it might be I whom they express in flesh and bone, and I remain at a distance.  But it is also by this distance that the sky and the water exist before me.  My contemplation is an excruciation only because it is also a joy.  I can not appropriate the snow field where I slide.  It remains foreign, forbidden, but I take delight in this very effort toward an impossible possession.  I experience it as a triumph, not as a defeat.  This means that man, in his vain attempt to be God, makes himself exist as man, and if he is satisfied with this existence, he coincides exactly with himself.  It is not granted him to exist without tending toward this being which he will never be.  But it is possible for him to want this tension even with the failure which it involves.  His being is lack of being, but this lack has a way of being which is precisely existence.  In Hegelian terms it might be said that we have here a negation of the negation by which the positive is re-established.  Man makes himself a lack, but he can deny the lack as lack and affirm himself as a positive existence.  He then assumes the failure.  And the condemned action, insofar as it is an effort to be, finds its validity insofar as it is a manifestation of existence.  However, rather than being a Hegelian act of surpassing, it is a matter of a conversion.  For in Hegel the surpassed terms are preserved only as abstract moments, whereas we consider that existence still remains a negativity in the positive affirmation of itself.  And it does not appear, in its turn, as the term of a further synthesis.  The failure is not surpassed, but assumed.  Existence asserts itself as an absolute which must seek its justification within itself and not suppress itself, even though it may be lost by preserving itself.  To attain his truth, man must not attempt to dispel the ambiguity of his being but, on the contrary, accept the task of realizing it.  He rejoins himself only to the extent that he agrees to remain at a distance from himself.  This conversion is sharply distinguished from the Stoic conversion in that it does not claim to oppose to the sensible universe a formal freedom which is without content.  To exist genuinely is not to deny this spontaneous movement of my transcendence, but only to refuse to lose myself in it.  Existentialist conversion should rather be compared to Husserlian reduction: let man put his will to be “in parentheses” and he will thereby be brought to the consciousness of his true condition.  And just as phenomenological reduction prevents the errors of dogmatism by suspending all affirmation concerning the mode of reality of the external world, whose flesh and bone presence the reduction does not, however, contest, so existentialist conversion does not suppress my instincts, desires, plans, and passions.  It merely prevents any possibility of failure by refusing to set up as absolutes the ends toward which my transcendence thrusts itself, and by considering them in their connection with the freedom which projects them.  The first implication of such an attitude is that the genuine man will not agree to recognize any foreign absolute.  When a man projects into an ideal heaven that impossible synthesis of the for-itself and the in-itself that is called God, it is because he wishes the regard of this existing Being to change his existence into being; but if he agrees not to be in order to exist genuinely, he will abandon the dream of an inhuman objectivity.  He will understand that it is not a matter of being right in the eyes of a God, but of being right in his own eyes.  Renouncing the thought of seeking the guarantee for his existence outside of himself, he will also refuse to believe in unconditioned values which would set themselves up athwart his freedom like things.  Value is this lacking-being of which freedom makes itself a lack; and it is because the latter makes itself a lack that value appears.  It is desire which creates the desirable, and the project which sets up the end.  It is human existence which makes values spring up in the world on the basis of which it will be able to judge the enterprise in which it will be engaged.  But first it locates itself beyond any pessimism, as beyond any optimism, for the fact of its original springing forth is a pure contingency.  Before existence there is no more reason to exist than not to exist.  The lack of existence can not be evaluated since it is the fact on the basis of which all evaluation is defined.  It can not be compared to anything for there is nothing outside of it to serve as a term of comparison.  This rejection of any extrinsic justification also confirms the rejection of an original pessimism which we posited at the beginning.  Since it is unjustifiable from without, to declare from without that it is unjustifiable is not to condemn it.  And the truth is that outside of existence there is nobody.  Man exists.  For him it is not a question of wondering whether his presence in the world is useful, whether life is worth the trouble of being lived.  These questions make no sense.  It is a matter of knowing whether he wants to live and under what conditions.  But if man is free to define for himself the conditions of a life which is valid in his own eyes, can he not choose whatever he likes and act however he likes? Dostoievsky asserted, “If God does not exist, everything is permitted.” Today’s believers use this formula for their own advantage.  To re-establish man at the heart of his destiny is, they claim, to repudiate all ethics.  However, far from God’s absence authorizing all license, the contrary is the case, because man is abandoned on the earth, because his acts are definitive, absolute engagements.  He bears the responsibility for a world which is not the work of a strange power, but of himself, where his defeats are inscribed, and his victories as well.  A God can pardon, efface, and compensate.  But if God does not exist, man’s faults are inexpiable.  If it is claimed that, whatever the case may be, this earthly stake has no importance, this is precisely because one invokes that inhuman objectivity which we declined at the start.  One can not start by saying that our earthly destiny has or has not importance, for it depends upon us to give it importance.  It is up to man to make it important to be a man, and he alone can feel his success or failure.  And if it is again said that nothing forces him to try to justify his being in this way, then one is playing upon the notion of freedom in a dishonest way.  The believer is also free to sin.  The divine law is imposed upon him only from the moment he decides to save his soul.  In the Christian religion, though one speaks very little about them today, there are also the damned.  Thus, on the earthly plane, a life which does not seek to ground itself will be a pure contingency.  But it is permitted to wish to give itself a meaning and a truth, and it then meets rigorous demands within its own heart.  However, even among the proponents of secular ethics, there are many who charge existentialism with offering no objective content to the moral act.  It is said that this philosophy is subjective, even solipsistic.  If he is once enclosed within himself, how can man get out? But there too we have a great deal of dishonesty.  It is rather well known that the fact of being a subject is a universal fact and that the Cartesian cogito expresses both the most individual experience and the most objective truth.  By affirming that the source of all values resides in the freedom of man, existentialism merely carries on the tradition of Kant, Fichte, and Hegel, who, in the words of Hegel himself, “have taken for their point of departure the principle according to which the essence of right and duty and the essence of the thinking and willing subject are absolutely identical.” The idea that defines all humanism is that the world is not a given world, foreign to man, one to which he has to force himself to yield from without.  It is the world willed by man, insofar as his will expresses his genuine reality.  Some will answer, “All well and good.  But Kant escapes solipsism because for him genuine reality is the human person insofar as it transcends its empirical embodiment and chooses to be universal.” And doubtless Hegel asserted that the “right of individuals to their particularity is equally contained in ethical substantiality, since particularity is the extreme, phenomenal modality in which moral reality exists ( Philosophy of Right, § 154).” But for him particularity appears only as a moment of the totality in which it must surpass itself.  Whereas for existentialism, it is not impersonal universal man who is the source of values, but the plurality of concrete, particular men projecting themselves toward their ends on the basis of situations whose particularity is as radical and as irreducible as subjectivity itself.  How could men, originally separated, get together? And, indeed, we are coming to the real situation of the problem.  But to state it is not to demonstrate that it can not be resolved.  On the contrary, we must here again invoke the notion of Hegelian “displacement.” There is an ethics only if there is a problem to solve.  And it can be said, by inverting the preceding line of argument, that the ethics which have given solutions by effacing the fact of the separation of men are not valid precisely because there is this separation.  An ethics of ambiguity will be one which will refuse to deny a priori that separate existants can, at the same time, be bound to each other, that their individual freedoms can forge laws valid for all.  Before undertaking the quest for a solution, it is interesting to note that the notion of situation and the recognition of separation which it implies are not peculiar to existentialism.  We also meet it in Marxism which, from one point of view, can be considered as an apotheosis of subjectivity.  Like all radical humanism, Marxism rejects the idea of an inhuman objectivity and locates itself in the tradition of Kant and Hegel.  Unlike the old kind of Utopian socialism which confronted earthly order with the archetypes of Justice, Order, and Good, Marx does not consider that certain human situations are, in themselves and absolutely, preferable to others.  It is the needs of people, the revolt of a class, which define aims and goals.  It is from within a rejected situation, in the light of this rejection, that a new state appears as desirable; only the will of men decides; and it is on the basis of a certain individual act of rooting itself in the historical and economic world that this will thrusts itself toward the future and then chooses a perspective where such words as goal, progress, efficacy, success, failure, action, adversaries, instruments, and obstacles, have a meaning.  Then certain acts can be regarded as good and others as bad.  In order for the universe of revolutionary values to arise, a subjective movement must create them in revolt and hope.  And this movement appears so essential to Marxists that if an intellectual or a bourgeois also claims to want revolution, they distrust him.  They think that it is only from the outside, by abstract recognition, that the bourgeois intellectual can adhere to these values which he himself has not set up.  Regardless of what he does, his situation makes it impossible for the ends pursued by proletarians to be absolutely his ends too, since it is not the very impulse of his life which has begotten them.  However, in Marxism, if it is true that the goal and the meaning of action are defined by human wills, these wills do not appear as free.  They are the reflection of objective conditions by which the situation of the class or the people under consideration is defined.  In the present moment of the development of capitalism, the proletariat can not help wanting its elimination as a class.  Subjectivity is re-absorbed into the objectivity of the given world.  Revolt, need, hope, rejection, and desire are only the resultants of external forces.  The psychology of behavior endeavors to explain this alchemy.  It is known that that is the essential point on which existentialist ontology is opposed to dialectical materialism.  We think that the meaning of the situation does not impose itself on the consciousness of a passive subject, that it surges up only by the disclosure which a free subject effects in his project.  It appears evident to us that in order to adhere to Marxism, to enroll in a party, and in one rather than another, to be actively attached to it, even a Marxist needs a decision whose source is only in himself.  And this autonomy is not the privilege (or the defect) of the intellectual or the bourgeois.  The proletariat, taken as a whole, as a class, can become conscious of its situation in more than one way.  It can want the revolution to be brought about by one party or another.  It can let itself be lured on, as happened to the German proletariat, or can sleep in the dull comfort which capitalism grants it, as does the American proletariat.  It may be said that in all these cases it is betraying; still, it must be free to betray.  Or, if one pretends to distinguish the real proletariat from a treacherous proletariat, or a misguided or unconscious or mystified one, then it is no longer a flesh and blood proletariat that one is dealing with, but the idea of a proletariat, one of those ideas which Marx ridiculed.  Besides, in practice, Marxism does not always deny freedom.  The very notion of action would lose all meaning if history were a mechanical unrolling in which man appears only as a passive conductor of outside forces.  By acting, as also by preaching action, the Marxist revolutionary asserts himself as a veritable agent; he assumes himself to be free.  And it is even curious to note that most Marxists of today — unlike Marx himself — feel no repugnance at the edifying dullness of moralizing speeches.  They do not limit themselves to finding fault with their adversaries in the name of historical realism.  When they tax them with cowardice, lying, selfishness, and venality, they very well mean to condemn them in the name of a moralism superior to history.  Likewise, in the eulogies which they bestow upon each other they exalt the eternal virtues, courage, abnegation, lucidity, integrity.  It may be said that all these words are used for propagandistic purposes, that it is only a matter of expedient language.  But this is to admit that this language is heard, that it awakens an echo in the hearts of those to whom it is addressed.  Now, neither scorn nor esteem would have any meaning if one regarded the acts of a man as a purely mechanical resultant.  In order for men to become indignant or to admire, they must be conscious of their own freedom and the freedom of others.  Thus, everything occurs within each man and in the collective tactics as if men were free.  But then what revelation can a coherent humanism hope to oppose to the testimony which man brings to bear upon himself? So Marxists often find themselves having to confirm this belief in freedom, even if they have to reconcile it with determination as well as they can.  However, while this concession is wrested from them by the very practice of action, it is in the name of action that they attempt to condemn a philosophy of freedom.  They declare authoritatively that the existence of freedom would make any concerted enterprise impossible.  According to them, if the individual were not constrained by the external world to want this rather than that, there would be nothing to defend him against his whims.  Here, in different language, we again meet the charge formulated by the respectful believer of supernatural imperatives.  In the eyes of the Marxist, as of the Christian, it seems that to act freely is to give up justifying one’s acts.  This is a curious reversal of the Kantian “you must; therefore, you can.” Kant postulates freedom in the name of morality.  The Marxist, on the contrary, declares, “You must; therefore, you can not.” To him a man’s action seems valid only if the man has not helped set it going by an internal movement.  To admit the ontological possibility of a choice is already to betray the Cause.  Does this mean that the revolutionary attitude in any way gives up being a moral attitude? It would be logical, since we observed with Hegel that it is only insofar as the choice is not realized at first that it can be set up as a moral choice.  But here again Marxist thought hesitates.  It sneers at idealistic ethics which do not bite into the world; but its scoffing signifies that there can be no ethics outside of action, not that action lowers itself to the level of a simple natural process.  It is quite evident that the revolutionary enterprise has a human meaning.  Lenin’s remark, which says, in substance, “I call any action useful to the party moral action; I call it immoral if it is harmful to the party,” cuts two ways.  On the one hand, he refuses to accept outdated values, but he also sees in political operation a total manifestation of man as having-to-be at the same time as being.  Lenin refuses to set up ethics abstractly because he means to realize it effectively.  And yet a moral idea is present in the words, writings, and acts of Marxists.  It is contradictory, then, to reject with horror the moment of choice which is precisely the moment when spirit passes into nature, the moment of the concrete fulfillment of man and morality.  As for us, whatever the case may be, we believe in freedom.  Is it true that this belief must lead us to despair? Must we grant this curious paradox: that from the moment a man recognizes himself as free, he is prohibited from wishing for anything? On the contrary, it appears to us that by turning toward this freedom we are going to discover a principle of action whose range will be universal.  The characteristic feature of all ethics is to consider human life as a game that can be won or lost and to teach man the means of winning.  Now, we have seen that the original scheme of man is ambiguous: he wants to be, and to the extent that he coincides with this wish, he fails.  All the plans in which this will to be is actualized are condemned; and the ends circumscribed by these plans remain mirages.  Human transcendence is vainly engulfed in those miscarried attempts.  But man also wills himself to be a disclosure of being, and if he coincides with this wish, he wins, for the fact is that the world becomes present by his presence in it.  But the disclosure implies a perpetual tension to keep being at a certain distance, to tear oneself from the world, and to assert oneself as a freedom.  To wish for the disclosure of the world and to assert oneself as freedom are one and the same movement.  Freedom is the source from which all significations and all values spring.  It is the original condition of all justification of existence.  The man who seeks to justify his life must want freedom itself absolutely and above everything else.  At the same time that it requires the realization of concrete ends, of particular projects, it requires itself universally.  It is not a ready-made value which offers itself from the outside to my abstract adherence, but it appears (not on the plane of facility, but on the moral plane) as a cause of itself.  It is necessarily summoned up by the values which it sets up and through which it sets itself up.  It can not establish a denial of itself, for in denying itself, it would deny the possibility of any foundation.  To will oneself moral and to will oneself free are one and the same decision.  It seems that the Hegelian notion of “displacement” which we relied on a little while ago is now turning against us.  There is ethics only if ethical action is not present.  Now, Sartre declares that every man is free, that there is no way of his not being free.  When he wants to escape his destiny, he is still freely fleeing it.  Does not this presence of a so to speak natural freedom contradict the notion of ethical freedom? What meaning can there be in the words to will oneself free, since at the beginning we are free? It is contradictory to set freedom up as something conquered if at first it is something given.  This objection would mean something only if freedom were a thing or a quality naturally attached to a thing.  Then, in effect, one would either have it or not have it.  But the fact is that it merges with the very movement of this ambiguous reality which is called existence and which is only by making itself be; to such an extent that it is precisely only by having to be conquered that it gives itself.  To will oneself free is to effect the transition from nature to morality by establishing a genuine freedom on the original upsurge of our existence.  Every man is originally free, in the sense that he spontaneously casts himself into the world.  But if we consider this spontaneity in its facticity, it appears to us only as a pure contingency, an upsurging as stupid as the clinamen of the Epicurean atom which turned up at any moment whatsoever from any direction whatsoever.  And it was quite necessary for the atom to arrive somewhere.  But its movement was not justified by this result which had not been chosen.  It remained absurd.  Thus, human spontaneity always projects itself toward something.  The psychoanalyst discovers a meaning even in abortive acts and attacks of hysteria.  But in order for this meaning to justify the transcendence which discloses it, it must itself be founded, which it will never be if I do not choose to found it myself.  Now, I can evade this choice.  We have said that it would be contradictory deliberately to will oneself not free.  But one can choose not to will himself free.  In laziness, heedlessness, capriciousness, cowardice, impatience, one contests the meaning of the project at the very moment that one defines it.  The spontaneity of the subject is then merely a vain living palpitation, its movement toward the object is a flight, and itself is an absence.  To convert the absence into presence, to convert my flight into will, I must assume my project positively.  It is not a matter of retiring into the completely inner and, moreover, abstract movement of a given spontaneity, but of adhering to the concrete and particular movement by which this spontaneity defines itself by thrusting itself toward an end.  It is through this end that it sets up that my spontaneity confirms itself by reflecting upon itself.  Then, by a single movement, my will, establishing the content of the act, is legitimized by it.  I realize my escape toward the other as a freedom when, assuming the presence of the object, I thereby assume myself before it as a presence.  But this justification requires a constant tension.  My project is never founded; it founds itself.  To avoid the anguish of this permanent choice, one may attempt to flee into the object itself, to engulf one’s own presence in it.  In the servitude of the serious, the original spontaneity strives to deny itself.  It strives in vain, and meanwhile it then fails to fulfill itself as moral freedom.  We have just described only the subjective and formal aspect of this freedom.  But we also ought to ask ourselves whether one can will oneself free in any matter, whatsoever it may be.  It must first be observed that this will is developed in the course of time.  It is in time that the goal is pursued and that freedom confirms itself.  And this assumes that it is realized as a unity in the unfolding of time.  One escapes the absurdity of the clinamen only by escaping the absurdity of the pure moment.  An existence would be unable to found itself if moment by moment it crumbled into nothingness.  That is why no moral question presents itself to the child as long as he is still incapable of recognizing himself in the past or seeing himself in the future.  It is only when the moments of his life begin to be organized into behaviour that he can decide and choose.  The value of the chosen end is confirmed and, reciprocally, the genuineness of the choice is manifested concretely through patience, courage, and fidelity.  If I leave behind an act which I have accomplished, it becomes a thing by falling into the past.  It is no longer anything but a stupid and opaque fact.  In order to prevent this metamorphosis, I must ceaselessly return to it and justify it in the unity of the project in which I am engaged.  Setting up the movement of my transcendence requires that I never let it uselessly fall back upon itself, that I prolong it indefinitely.  Thus I can not genuinely desire an end today without desiring it through my whole existence, insofar as it is the future of this present moment and insofar as it is the surpassed past of days to come.  To will is to engage myself to persevere in my will.  This does not mean that I ought not aim at any limited end.  I may desire absolutely and forever a revelation of a moment.  This means that the value of this provisional end will be confirmed indefinitely.  But this living confirmation can not be merely contemplative and verbal.  It is carried out in an act.  The goal toward which I surpass myself must appear to me as a point of departure toward a new act of surpassing.  Thus, a creative freedom develops happily without ever congealing into unjustified facticity.  The creator leans upon anterior creations in order to create the possibility of new creations.  His present project embraces the past and places confidence in the freedom to come, a confidence which is never disappointed.  It discloses being at the end of a further disclosure.  At each moment freedom is confirmed through all creation.  However, man does not create the world.  He succeeds in disclosing it only through the resistance which the world opposes to him.  The will is defined only by raising obstacles, and by the contingency of facticity certain obstacles let themselves be conquered, and others do not.  This is what Descartes expressed when he said that the freedom of man is infinite, but his power is limited.  How can the presence of these limits be reconciled with the idea of a freedom confirmimg itself as a unity and an indefinite movement? In the face of an obstacle which it is impossible to overcome, stubbornness is stupid.  If I persist in beating my fist against a stone wall, my freedom exhausts itself in this useless gesture without succeeding in giving itself a content.  It debases itself in a vain contingency.  Yet, there is hardly a sadder virtue than resignation.  It transforms into phantoms and contingent reveries projects which had at the beginning been set up as will and freedom.  A young man has hoped for a happy or useful or glorious life.  If the man he has become looks upon these miscarried attempts of his adolescence with disillusioned indifference, there they are, forever frozen in the dead past.  When an effort fails, one declares bitterly that he has lost time and wasted his powers.  The failure condemns that whole part of ourselves which we had engaged in the effort.  It was to escape this dilemma that the Stoics preached indifference.  We could indeed assert our freedom against all constraint if we agreed to renounce the particularity of our projects.  If a door refuses to open, let us accept not opening it and there we are free.  But by doing that, one manages only to save an abstract notion of freedom.  It is emptied of all content and all truth.  The power of man ceases to be limited because it is annulled.  It is the particularity of the project which determines the limitation of the power, but it is also what gives the project its content and permits it to be set up.  There are people who are filled with such horror at the idea of a defeat that they keep themselves from ever doing anything.  But no one would dream of considering this gloomy passivity as the triumph of freedom.  The truth is that in order for my freedom not to risk coming to grief against the obstacle which its very engagement has raised, in order that it might still pursue its movement in the face of the failure, it must, by giving itself a particular content, aim by means of it at an end which is nothing else but precisely the free movement of existence.  Popular opinion is quite right in admiring a man who, having been ruined or having suffered an accident, knows how to gain the upper hand, that is, renew his engagement in the world, thereby strongly asserting the independence of freedom in relation to thing.  Thus, when the sick Van Gogh calmly accepted the prospect of a future in which he would be unable to paint any more, there was no sterile resignation.  For him painting was a personal way of life and of communication with others which in another form could be continued even in an asylum.  The past will be integrated and freedom will be confirmed in a renunciation of this kind.  It will be lived in both heartbreak and joy.  In heartbreak, because the project is then robbed of its particularity — it sacrifices its flesh and blood.  But in joy, since at the moment one releases his hold, he again finds his hands free and ready to stretch out toward a new future.  But this act of passing beyond is conceivable only if what the content has in view is not to bar up the future, but, on the contrary, to plan new possibilities.  This brings us back by another route to what we had already indicated.  My freedom must not seek to trap being but to disclose it.  The disclosure is the transition from being to existence.  The goal which my freedom aims at is conquering existence across the always inadequate density of being.  However, such salvation is only possible if, despite obstacles and failures, a man preserves the disposal of his future, if the situation opens up more possibilities to him.  In case his transcendence is cut off from his goal or there is no longer any hold on objects which might give it a valid content, his spontaneity is dissipated without founding anything.  Then he may not justify his existence positively and he feels its contingency with wretched disgust.  There is no more obnoxious way to punish a man than to force him to perform acts which make no sense to him, as when one empties and fills the same ditch indefinitely, when one makes soldiers who are being punished march up and down, or when one forces a schoolboy to copy lines.  Revolts broke out in Italy in September 1946 because the unemployed were set to breaking pebbles which served no purpose whatever.  As is well known, this was also the weakness which ruined the national workshops in 1848.  This mystification of useless effort is more intolerable than fatigue.  Life imprisonment is the most horrible of punishments because it preserves existence in its pure facticity but forbids it all legitimation.  A freedom can not will itself without willing itself as an indefinite movement.  It must absolutely reject the constraints which arrest its drive toward itself.  This rejection takes on a positive aspect when the constraint is natural.  One rejects the illness by curing it.  But it again assumes the negative aspect of revolt when the oppressor is a human freedom.  One can not deny being: the in-itself is, and negation has no hold over this being, this pure positivity; one does not escape this fullness: a destroyed house is a ruin; a broken chain is scrap iron: one attains only signification and, through it, the for-itself which is projected there; the for-itself carries nothingness in its heart and can be annihilated, whether in the very upsurge of its existence or through the world in which it exists.  The prison is repudiated as such when the prisoner escapes.  But revolt, insofar as it is pure negative movement, remains abstract.  It is fulfilled as freedom only by returning to the positive, that is, by giving itself a content through action, escape, political struggle, revolution.  Human transcendence then seeks, with the destruction of the given situation, the whole future which will flow from its victory.  It resumes its indefinite rapport with itself.  There are limited situations where this return to the positive is impossible, where the future is radically blocked off.  Revolt can then be achieved only in the definitive rejection of the imposed situation, in suicide.  It can be seen that, on the one hand, freedom can always save itself, for it is realized as a disclosure of existence through its very failures, and it can again confirm itself by a death freely chosen.  But, on the other hand, the situations which it discloses through its project toward itself do not appear as equivalents.  It regards as privileged situations those which permit it to realize itself as indefinite movement; that is, it wishes to pass beyond everything which limits its power; and yet, this power is always limited.  Thus, just as life is identified with the will-to-live, freedom always appears as a movement of liberation.  It is only by prolonging itself through the freedom of others that it manages to surpass death itself and to realize itself as an indefinite unity.  Later on we shall see what problems such a relationship raises.  For the time being it is enough for us to have established the fact that the words “to will oneself free” have a positive and concrete meaning.  If man wishes to save his existence, as only he himself can do, his original spontaneity must be raised to the height of moral freedom by taking itself as an end through the disclosure of a particular content.  But a new question is immediately raised.  If man has one and only one way to save his existence, how can he choose not to choose it in all cases? How is a bad willing possible? We meet with this problem in all ethics, since it is precisely the possibility of a perverted willing which gives a meaning to the idea of virtue.  We know the answer of Socrates, of Plato, of Spinoza: “No one is willfully bad.” And if Good is a transcendent thing which is more or less foreign to man, one imagines that the mistake can be explained by error.  But if one grants that the moral world is the world genuinely willed by man, all possibility of error is eliminated.  Moreover, in Kantian ethics, which is at the origin of all ethics of autonomy, it is very difficult to account for an evil will.  As the choice of his character which the subject makes is achieved in the intelligible world by a purely rational will, one can not understand how the latter expressly rejects the law which it gives to itself.  But this is because Kantism defined man as a pure positivity, and it therefore recognized no other possibility in him than coincidence with himself.  We, too, define morality by this adhesion to the self; and this is why we say that man can not positively decide between the negation and the assumption of his freedom, for as soon as he decides, he assumes it.  He can not positively will not to be free for such a willing would be self-destructive.  Only, unlike Kant, we do not see man as being essentially a positive will.  On the contrary, he is first defined as a negativity.  He is first at a distance from himself.  He can coincide with himself only by agreeing never to rejoin himself.  There is within him a perpetual playing with the negative, and he thereby escapes himself, he escapes his freedom.  And it is precisely because an evil will is here possible that the words “to will oneself free” have a meaning.  Therefore, not only do we assert that the existentialist doctrine permits the elaboration of an ethics, but it even appears to us as the only philosophy in which an ethics has its place.  For, in a metaphysics of transcendence, in the classical sense of the term, evil is reduced to error; and in humanistic philosophies it is impossible to account for it, man being defined as complete in a complete world.  Existentialism alone gives — like religions — a real role to evil, and it is this, perhaps, which make its judgments so gloomy.  Men do not like to feel themselves in danger.  Yet, it is because there are real dangers, real failures and real earthly damnation that words like victory, wisdom, or joy have meaning.  Nothing is decided in advance, and it is because man has something to lose and because he can lose that he can also win.  Therefore, in the very condition of man there enters the possibility of not fulfilling this condition.  In order to fulfill it he must assume himself as a being who “makes himself a lack of being so that there might be being.” But the trick of dishonesty permits stopping at any moment whatsoever.  One may hesitate to make oneself a lack of being, one may withdraw before existence, or one may falsely assert oneself as being, or assert oneself as nothingness.  One may realize his freedom only as an abstract independence, or, on the contrary, reject with despair the distance which separates us from being.  All errors are possible since man is a negativity, and they are motivated by the anguish he feels in the face of his freedom.  Concretely, men slide incoherently from one attitude to another.  We shall limit ourselves to describing in their abstract form those which we have just indicated.  The Ethics of Ambiguity TABLE OF CONTENTS I Ambiguity and Freedom II Personal Freedom and Others III The Positive Aspect of Ambiguity 1.  The Aesthetic Attitude 2.  Freedom and Liberation 3.  The Antinomies of Action 4.  The Present and the Future 5.  Ambiguity Conclusion Index Cover The Ethics of Ambiguity II Man’s unhappiness, says Descartes, is due to his having first been a child.  And indeed the unfortunate choices which most men make can only be explained by the fact that they have taken place on the basis of childhood.  The child’s situation is characterized by his finding himself cast into a universe which he has not helped to establish, which has been fashioned without him, and which appears to him as an absolute to which he can only submit.  In his eyes, human inventions, words, customs, and values are given facts, as inevitable as the sky and the trees.  This means that the world in which he lives is a serious world, since the characteristic of the spirit of seriousness is to consider values as ready-made things.  That does not mean that the child himself is serious.  On the contrary, he is allowed to play, to expend his existence freely.  In his child’s circle he feels that he can passionately pursue and joyfully attain goals which he has set up for himself.  But if he fulfills this experience in all tranquillity, it is precisely because the domain open to his subjectivity seems insignificant and puerile in his own eyes.  He feels himself happily irresponsible.  The real world is that of adults where he is allowed only to respect and obey.  The naive victim of the mirage of the for-others, he believes in the being of his parents and teachers.  He takes them for the divinities which they vainly try to be and whose appearance they like to borrow before his ingenuous eyes.  Rewards, punishments, prizes, words of praise or blame instill in him the conviction that there exist a good and an evil which like a sun and a moon exist as ends in themselves.  In his universe of definite and substantial things, beneath the sovereign eyes of grown-up persons, he thinks that he too has being in a definite and substantial way.  He is a good little boy or a scamp; he enjoys being it.  If something deep inside him belies his conviction, he conceals this imperfection.  He consoles himself for an inconsistency which he attributes to his young age by pinning his hopes on the future.  Later on he too will become a big imposing statue.  While waiting, he plays at being, at being a saint, a hero, a guttersnipe.  He feels himself like those models whose images are sketched out in his books in broad, unequivocal strokes: explorer, brigand, sister of charity.  This game of being serious can take on such an importance in the child’s life that he himself actually becomes serious.  We know such children who are caricatures of adults.  Even when the joy of existing is strongest, when the child abandons himself to it, he feels himself protected against the risk of existence by the ceiling which human generations have built over his head.  And it is by virtue of this that the child’s condition (although it can be unhappy in other respects) is meta-physically privileged.  Normally the child escapes the anguish of freedom.  He can, if he likes, be recalcitrant, lazy; his whims and his faults concern only him.  They do not weigh upon the earth.  They can not make a dent in the serene order of a world which existed before him, without him, where he is in a state of security by virtue of his very insignificance.  He can do with impunity whatever he likes.  He knows that nothing can ever happen through him; everything is already given; his acts engage nothing, not even himself.  There are beings whose life slips by in an infantile world because, having been kept in a state of servitude and ignorance, they have no means of breaking the ceiling which is stretched over their heads.  Like the child, they can exercise their freedom, but only within this universe which has been set up before them, without them.  This is the case, for example, of slaves who have not raised themselves to the consciousness of their slavery.  The southern planters were not altogether in the wrong in considering the negroes who docilely submitted to their paternalism as “grown-up children.” To the extent that they respected the world of the whites the situation of the black slaves was exactly an infantile situation.  This is also the situation of women in many civilizations; they can only submit to the laws, the gods, the customs, and the truths created by the males.  Even today in western countries, among women who have not had in their work an apprenticeship of freedom, there are still many who take shelter in the shadow of men; they adopt without discussion the opinions and values recognized by their husband or their lover, and that allows them to develop childish qualities which are forbidden to adults because they are based on a feeling of irresponsibility.  If what is called women’s futility often has so much charm and grace, if it sometimes has a genuinely moving character, it is because it manifests a pure and gratuitous taste for existence, like the games of children; it is the absence of the serious.  The unfortunate thing is that in many cases this thoughtlessness, this gaiety, these charming inventions imply a deep complicity with the world of men which they seem so graciously to be contesting, and it is a mistake to be astonished, once the structure which shelters them seems to be in danger, to see sensitive, ingenuous, and light-minded women show themselves harder, more bitter, and even more furious or cruel than their masters.  It is then that we discover the difference which distinguishes them from an actual child: the child’s situation is imposed upon him, whereas the woman (I mean the western woman of today) chooses it or at least consents to it.  Ignorance and error are facts as inescapable as prison walls.  The negro slave of the eighteenth century, the Mohammedan woman enclosed in a harem have no instrument, be it in thought or by astonishment or anger, which permits them to attack the civilization which oppresses them.  Their behavior is defined and can be judged only within this given situation, and it is possible that in this situation, limited like every human situation, they realize a perfect assertion of their freedom.  But once there appears a possibility of liberation, it is resignation of freedom not to exploit the possibility, a resignation which implies dishonesty and which is a positive fault.  The fact is that it is very rare for the infantile world to maintain itself beyond adolescence.  From childhood on, flaws begin to be revealed in it.  With astonishment, revolt and disrespect the child little by little asks himself, “Why must I act that way? What good is it? And what will happen if I act in another way?” He discovers his subjectivity; he discovers that of others.  And when he arrives at the age of adolescence he begins to vacillate because he notices the contradictions among adults as well as their hesitations and weakness.  Men stop appearing as if they were gods, and at the same time the adolescent discovers the human character of the reality about him.  Language, customs, ethics, and values have their source in these uncertain creatures.  The moment has come when he too is going to be called upon to participate in their operation; his acts weigh upon the earth as much as those of other men.  He will have to choose and decide.  It is comprehensible that it is hard for him to live this moment of his history, and this is doubtless the deepest reason for the crisis of adolescence; the individual must at last assume his subjectivity.  From one point of view the collapsing of the serious world is a deliverance.  Although he was irresponsible, the child also felt himself defenseless before obscure powers which directed the course of things.  But whatever the joy of this liberation may be, it is not without great confusion that the adolescent finds himself cast into a world which is no longer ready-made, which has to be made; he is abandoned, unjustified, the prey of a freedom that is no longer chained up by anything.  What will he do in the face of this new situation? This is the moment when he decides.  If what might be called the natural history of an individual, his affective complexes, etcetera depend above all upon his childhood, it is adolescence which appears as the moment of moral choice.  Freedom is then revealed and he must decide upon his attitude in the face of it.  Doubtless, this decision can always be reconsidered, but the fact is that conversions are difficult because the world reflects back upon us a choice which is confirmed through this world which it has fashioned.  Thus, a more and more rigorous circle is formed from which one is more and more unlikely to escape.  Therefore, the misfortune which comes to man as a result of the fact that he was a child is that his freedom was first concealed from him and that all his life he will be nostalgic for the time when he did not know its exigencies.  This misfortune has still another aspect.  Moral choice is free, and therefore unforeseeable.  The child does not contain the man he will become.  Yet, it is always on the basis of what he has been that a man decides upon what he wants to be.  He draws the motivations of his moral attitude from within the character which he has given himself and from within the universe which is its correlative.  Now, the child set up this character and this universe little by little, without foreseeing its development.  He was ignorant of the disturbing aspect of this freedom which he was heedlessly exercising.  He tranquilly abandoned himself to whims, laughter, tears, and anger which seemed to him to have no morrow and no danger, and yet which left ineffaceable imprints about him.  The drama of original choice is that it goes on moment by moment for an entire lifetime, that it occurs without reason, before any reason, that freedom is there as if it were present only in the form of contingency.  This contingency recalls, in a way, the arbitrariness of the grace distributed by God in Calvinistic doctrine.  Here too there is a sort of predestination issuing not from an external tyranny but from the operation of the subject itself.  Only, we think that man has always a possible recourse to himself.  There is no choice so unfortunate that he cannot be saved.  It is in this moment of justification — a moment which extends throughout his whole adult life — that the attitude of man is placed on a moral plane.  The contingent spontaneity can not be judged in the name of freedom.  Yet a child already arouses sympathy or antipathy.  Every man casts himself into the world by making himself a lack of being; he thereby contributes to reinvesting it with human signification.  He discloses it.  And in this movement even the most outcast sometimes feel the joy of existing.  They then manifest existence as a happiness and the world as a source of joy.  But it is up to each one to make himself a lack of more or less various, profound, and rich aspects of being.  What is called vitality, sensitivity, and intelligence are not ready-made qualities, but a way of casting oneself into the world and of disclosing being.  Doubtless, every one casts himself into it on the basis of his physiological possibilities, but the body itself is not a brute fact.  It expresses our relationship to the world, and that is why it is an object of sympathy or repulsion.  And on the other hand, it determines no behavior.  There is vitality only by means of free generosity.  Intelligence supposes good will, and, inversely, a man is never stupid if he adapts his language and his behavior to his capacities, and sensitivity is nothing else but the presence which is attentive to the world and to itself.  The reward for these spontaneous qualities issues from the fact that they make significances and goals appear in the world.  They discover reasons for existing.  They confirm us in the pride and joy of our destiny as man.  To the extent that they subsist in an individual they still arouse sympathy, even if he has made himself hateful by the meaning which he has given to his life.  I have heard it said that at the Nuremberg trial Goering exerted a certain seductive power on his judges because of the vitality which emanated from him.  If we were to try to establish a kind of hierarchy among men, we would put those who are denuded of this living warmth — the tepidity which the Gospel speaks of — on the lowest rung of the ladder.  To exist is to make oneself a lack of being; it is to cast oneself into the world.  Those who occupy themselves in restraining this original movement can be considered as sub-men.  They have eyes and ears, but from their childhood on they make themselves blind and deaf, without love and without desire.  This apathy manifests a fundamental fear in the face of existence, in the face of the risks and tensions which it implies.  The sub-man rejects this “passion” which is his human condition, the laceration and the failure of that drive toward being which always misses its goal, but which thereby is the very existence which he rejects.  Such a choice immediately confirms itself.  Just as a bad painter, by a single movement, paints bad paintings and is satisfied with them, whereas in a work of value the artist immediately recognizes the demand of a higher sort of work, in like fashion the original poverty of his project exempts the sub-man from seeking to legitimize it.  He discovers around him only an insignificant and dull world.  How could this naked world arouse within him any desire to feel, to understand, to live? The less he exists, the less is there reason for him to exist, since these reasons are created only by existing.  Yet, he exists.  By the fact of transcending himself he indicates certain goals, he circumscribes certain values.  But he at once effaces these uncertain shadows.  His whole behavior tends toward an elimination of their ends.  By the incoherence of his plans, by his haphazard whims, or by his indifference, he reduces to nothingness the meaning of his surpassing.  His acts are never positive choices, only flights.  He can not prevent himself from being a presence in the world, but he maintains this presence on the plane of bare facticity.  However, if a man were permitted to be a brute fact, he would merge with the trees and pebbles which are not aware that they exist; we would consider these opaque lives with indifference.  But the sub-man arouses contempt, that is, one recognizes him to be responsible for himself at the moment that one accuses him of not willing himself.  The fact is that no man is a datum which is passively suffered; the rejection of existence is still another way of existing; nobody can know the peace of the tomb while he is alive.  There we have the defeat of the sub-man.  He would like to forget himself, to be ignorant of himself, but the nothingness which is at the heart of man is also the consciousness that he has of himself.  His negativity is revealed positively as anguish, desire, appeal, laceration, but as for the genuine return to the positive, the sub-man eludes it.  He is afraid of engaging himself in a project as he is afraid of being disengaged and thereby of being in a state of danger before the future, in the midst of its possibilities.  He is thereby led to take refuge in the ready-made values of the serious world.  He will proclaim certain opinions; he will take shelter behind a label; and to hide his indifference he will readily abandon himself to verbal outbursts or even physical violence.  One day, a monarchist, the next day, an anarchist, he is more readily anti-semitic, anti-clerical, or anti-republican.  Thus, though we have defined him as a denial and a flight, the sub-man is not a harmless creature.  He realizes himself in the world as a blind uncontrolled force which anybody can get control of.  In lynchings, in pogroms, in all the great bloody movements organized by the fanaticism of seriousness and passion, movements where there is no risk, those who do the actual dirty work are recruited from among the sub-men.  That is why every man who wills himself free within a human world fashioned by free men will be so disgusted by the sub-men.  Ethics is the triumph of freedom over facticity, and the sub-man feels only the facticity of his existence.  Instead of aggrandizing the reign of the human, he opposes his inert resistance to the projects of other men.  No project has meaning in the world disclosed by such an existence.  Man is defined as a wild flight.  The world about him is bare and incoherent.  Nothing ever happens; nothing merits desire or effort.  The sub-man makes his way across a world deprived of meaning toward a death which merely confirms his long negation of himself.  The only thing revealed in this experience is the absurd facticity of an existence which remains forever unjustified if it has not known how to justify itself.  The sub-man experiences the desert of the world in his boredom.  And the strange character of a universe with which he has created no bond also arouses fear in him.  Weighted down by present events, he is bewildered before the darkness of the future which is haunted by frightful specters, war, sickness, revolution, fascism, bolshevism.  The more indistinct these dangers are, the more fearful they become.  The sub-man is not very clear about what he has to lose, since he has nothing, but this very uncertainty re-enforces his terror.  Indeed, what he fears is that the shock of the unforeseen may remind him of the agonizing consciousness of himself.  Thus, fundamental as a man’s fear in the face of existence may be, though he has chosen from his earliest years to deny his presence in the world, he can not keep himself from existing, he can not efface the agonizing evidence of his freedom.  That is why, as we have just seen, in order to get rid of his freedom, he is led to engage it positively.  The attitude of the sub-man passes logically over into that of the serious man; he forces himself to submerge his freedom in the content which the latter accepts from society.  He loses himself in the object in order to annihilate his subjectivity.  This certitude has been described so frequently that it will not be necessary to consider it at length.  Hegel has spoken of it ironically.  In The Phenomenology of Mind he has shown that the sub-man plays the part of the inessential in the face of the object which is considered as the essential.  He suppresses himself to the advantage of the Thing, which, sanctified by respect, appears in the form of a Cause, science, philosophy, revolution, etc.  But the truth is that this ruse miscarries, for the Cause can not save the individual insofar as he is a concrete and separate existence.  After Hegel, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche also railed at the deceitful stupidity of the serious man and his universe.  And Being and Nothingness is in large part a description of the serious man and his universe.  The serious man gets rid of his freedom by claiming to subordinate it to values which would be unconditioned.  He imagines that the accession to these values likewise permanently confers value upon himself.  Shielded with “rights,” he fulfills himself as a being who is escaping from the stress of existence.  The serious is not defined by the nature of the ends pursued.  A frivolous lady of fashion can have this mentality of the serious as well as an engineer.  There is the serious from the moment that freedom denies itself to the advantage of ends which one claims are absolute.  Since all of this is well known, I should like to make only a few remarks in this place.  It is easily understood why, of all the attitudes which are not genuine, the latter is the most widespread; because every man was first a child.  After having lived under the eyes of the gods, having been given the promise of divinity, one does not readily accept becoming simply a man with all his anxiety and doubt.  What is to be done? What is to be believed? Often the young man, who has not, like the sub-man, first rejected existence, so that these questions are not even raised, is nevertheless frightened at having to answer them.  After a more or less long crisis, either he turns back toward the world of his parents and teachers or he adheres to the values which are new but seem to him just as sure.  Instead of assuming an affectivity which would throw him dangerously beyond himself, he represses it.  Liquidation, in its classic form of transference and sublimation, is the passage from the affective to the serious in the propitious shadow of dishonesty.  The thing that matters to the serious man is not so much the nature of the object which he prefers to himself, but rather the fact of being able to lose himself in it.  So much so, that the movement toward the object is, in fact, through his arbitrary act the most radical assertion of subjectivity: to believe for belief’s sake, to will for will’s sake is, detaching transcendence from its end, to realize one’s freedom in its empty and absurd form of freedom of indifference.  The serious man’s dishonesty issues from his being obliged ceaselessly to renew the denial of this freedom.  He chooses to live in an infantile world, but to the child the values are really given.  The serious man must mask the movement by which he gives them to himself, like the mythomaniac who while reading a love-letter pretends to forget that she has sent it to herself.  We have already pointed out that certain adults can live in the universe of the serious in all honesty, for example, those who are denied all instruments of escape, those who are enslaved or who are mystified.  The less economic and social circumstances allow an individual to act upon the world, the more this world appears to him as given.  This is the case of women who inherit a long tradition of submission and of those who are called “the humble.” There is often laziness and timidity in their resignation; their honesty is not quite complete; but to the extent that it exists, their freedom remains available, it is not denied.  They can, in their situation of ignorant and powerless individuals, know the truth of existence and raise themselves to a properly moral life.  It even happens that they turn the freedom which they have thus won against the very object of their respect; thus, in A Doll’s House, the childlike naivete of the heroine leads her to rebel against the lie of the serious.  On the contrary, the man who has the necessary instruments to escape this lie and who does not want to use them consumes his freedom in denying them.  He makes himself serious.  He dissimulates his subjectivity under the shield of rights which emanate from the ethical universe recognized by him; he is no longer a man, but a father, a boss, a member of the Christian Church or the Communist Party.  If one denies the subjective tension of freedom one is evidently forbidding himself universally to will freedom in an indefinite movement.  By virtue of the fact that he refuses to recognize that he is freely establishing the value of the end he sets up, the serious man makes himself the slave of that end.  He forgets that every goal is at the same time a point of departure and that human freedom is the ultimate, the unique end to which man should destine himself.  He accords an absolute meaning to the epithet useful, which, in truth, has no more meaning if taken by itself than the words high, low, right, and left.  It simply designates a relationship and requires a complement: useful for this or that.  The complement itself must be put into question, and, as we shall see later on, the whole problem of action is then raised.  But the serious man puts nothing into question.  For the military man, the army is useful; for the colonial administrator, the highway; for the serious revolutionary, the revolution — army, highway, revolution, productions becoming inhuman idols to which one will not hesitate to sacrifice man himself.  Therefore, the serious man is dangerous.  It is natural that he makes himself a tyrant.  Dishonestly ignoring the subjectivity of his choice, he pretends that the unconditioned value of the object is being asserted through him; and by the same token he also ignores the value of the subjectivity and the freedom of others, to such an extent that, sacrificing them to the thing, he persuades himself that what he sacrifices is nothing.  The colonial administrator who has raised the highway to the stature of an idol will have no scruple about assuring its construction at the price of a great number of lives of the natives; for, what value has the life of a native who is incompetent, lazy, and clumsy when it comes to building highways? The serious leads to a fanaticism which is as formidable as the fanaticism of passion.  It is the fanaticism of the Inquisition which does not hesitate to impose a credo, that is, an internal movement, by means of external constraints.  It is the fanaticism of the Vigilantes of America who defend morality by means of lynchings.  it is the political fanaticism which empties politics of all human content and imposes the State, not for individuals, but against them.  In order to justify the contradictory, absurd, and outrageous aspects of this kind of behavior, the serious man readily takes refuge in disputing the serious, but it is the serious of others which he disputes, not his own.  Thus, the colonial administrator is not unaware of the trick of irony.  He contests the importance of the happiness, the comfort, the very life of the native, but he reveres the Highway, the Economy, the French Empire; he reveres himself as a servant of these divinities.  Almost all serious men cultivate an expedient levity; we are familiar with the genuine gaiety of Catholics, the fascist “sense of humor.” There are also some who do not even feel the need for such a weapon.  They hide from themselves the incoherence of their choice by taking flight.  As soon as the Idol is no longer concerned, the serious man slips into the attitude of the sub-man.  He keeps himself from existing because he is not capable of existing without a guarantee.  Proust observed with astonishment that a great doctor or a great professor often shows himself, outside of his specialty, to be lacking in sensitivity, intelligence, and humanity.  The reason for this is that having abdicated his freedom, he has nothing else left but his techniques.  In domains where his techniques are not applicable, he either adheres to the most ordinary of values or fulfills himself as a flight.  The serious man stubbornly engulfs his transcendence in the object which bars the horizon and bolts the sky.  The rest of the world is a faceless desert.  Here again one sees how such a choice is immediately confirmed.  If there is being only, for example, in the form of the Army, how could the military man wish for anything else than to multiply barracks and maneuvers? No appeal rises from the abandoned zones where nothing can be reaped because nothing has been sown.  As soon as he leaves the staff, the old general becomes dull.  That is why the serious man’s life loses all meaning if he finds himself cut off from his ends.  Ordinarily, he does not put all his eggs into one basket, but if it happens that a failure or old age ruins all his justifications, then, unless there is a conversion, which is always possible, he no longer has any relief except in flight; ruined, dishonored, this important personage is now only a “has-been.” He joins the sub-man, unless by suicide he once and for all puts an end to the agony of his freedom.  It is in a state of fear that the serious man feels this dependence upon the object; and the first of virtues, in his eyes, is prudence.  He escapes the anguish of freedom only to fall into a state of preoccupation, of worry.  Everything is a threat to him, since the thing which he has set up as an idol is an externality and is thus in relationship with the whole universe and consequently threatened by the whole universe; and since, despite all precautions, he will never be the master of this exterior world to which he has consented to submit, he will be constantly upset by the uncontrollable course of events.  He will always be saying that he is disappointed, for his wish to have the world harden into a thing is belied by the very movement of life.  The future will contest his present successes; his children will disobey him, his will will be opposed by those of strangers; he will be a prey to illhumor and bitterness.  His very successes have a taste of ashes, for the serious is one of those ways of trying to realize the impossible synthesis of the in-itself and the foritself.  The serious man wills himself to be a god; but he is not one and knows it.  He wishes to rid himself of his subjectivity, but it constantly risks being unmasked; it is unmasked.  Transcending all goals, reflection wonders, “What’s the use?” There then blazes forth the absurdity of a life which has sought outside of itself the justifications which it alone could give itself.  Detached from the freedom which might have genuinely grounded them, all the ends that have been pursued appear arbitrary and useless.  This failure of the serious sometimes brings about a radical disorder.  Conscious of being unable to be anything, man then decides to be nothing.  We shall call this attitude nihilistic.  The nihilist is close to the spirit of seriousness, for instead of realizing his negativity as a living movement, he conceives his annihilation in a substantial way.  He wants to be nothing, and this nothing that he dreams of is still another sort of being, the exact Hegelian antithesis of being, a stationary datum.  Nihilism is disappointed seriousness which has turned back upon itself.  A choice of this kind is not encountered among those who, feeling the joy of existence, assume its gratuity.  It appears either at the moment of adolescence, when the individual, seeing his child’s universe flow away, feels the lack which is in his heart, or, later on, when the attempts to fulfill himself as a being have failed; in any case, among men who wish to rid themselves of the anxiety of their freedom by denying the world and themselves.  By this rejection, they draw near to the sub-man.  The difference is that their withdrawal is not their original movement.  At first, they cast themselves into the world, sometimes even with a largeness of spirit.  They exist and they know it.  It sometimes happens that, in his state of deception, a man maintains a sort of affection for the serious world; this is how Sartre describes Baudelaire in his study of the poet.  Baudelaire felt a burning rancor in regard to the values of his childhood, but this rancor still involved some respect.  Scorn alone liberated him.  It was necessary for him that the universe which he rejected continue in order for him to detest it and scoff at it; it is the attitude of the demoniacal man as Jouhandeau has also described him: one stubbornly maintains the values of childhood, of a society, or of a Church in order to be able to trample upon them.  The demoniacal man is still very close to the serious; he wants to believe in it; he confirms it by his very revolt; he feels himself as a negation and a freedom, but he does not realize this freedom as a positive liberation.  One can go much further in rejection by occupying himself not in scorning but in annihilating the rejected world and himself along with it.  For example, the man who gives himself to a cause which he knows to be lost chooses to merge the world with one of its aspects which carries within it the germ of its ruin, involving himself in this condemned universe and condemning himself with it.  Another man devotes his time and energy to an under-taking which was not doomed to failure at the start but which he himself is bent on ruining.  Still another rejects each of his projects one after the other, frittering them away in a series of caprices and thereby systematically annuling the ends which he is aiming at.  The constant negation of the word by the word, of the act by the act, of art by art was realized by Dadaist incoherence.  By following a strict injunction to commit disorder and anarchy, one achieved the abolition of all behavior, and therefore of all ends and of oneself.  But this will to negation is forever belying itself, for it manifests itself as a presence at the very moment that it displays itself.  It therefore implies a constant tension, inversely symmetrical with the existential and more painful tension, for if it is true that man is not, it is also true that he exists, and in order to realize his negativity positively he will have to contradict constantly the movement of existence.  If one does not resign himself to suicide one slips easily into a more stable attitude than the shrill rejection of nihilism.  Surrealism provides us with a historical and concrete example of different possible kinds of evolution.  Certain initiates, such as Vache and Crevel, had recourse to the radical solution of suicide.  Others destroyed their bodies and ruined their minds by drugs.  Other succeeded in a sort of moral suicide; by dint of depopulating the world around them, they found themselves in a desert, with themselves reduced to the level of the sub-man; they no longer try to flee, they are fleeing.  There are also some who have again sought out the security of the serious.  They have reformed, arbitrarily choosing marriage, politics, or religion as refuges.  Even the surrealists who have wanted to remain faithful to themselves have been unable to avoid returning to the positive, to the serious.  The negation of aesthetic, spiritual, and moral values has become an ethics; unruliness has become a rule.  We have been present at the establishment of a new Church, with its dogmas, its rites, its faithful, its priests, and even its martyrs; today, there is nothing of the destroyer in Breton; he is a pope.  And as every assassination of painting is still a painting, a lot of surrealists have found themselves the authors of positive works; their revolt has become the matter on which their career has been built.  Finally, some of them, in a genuine return to the positive, have been able to realize their freedom; they have given it a content without disavowing it.  They have engaged themselves, without losing themselves, in political action, in intellectual or artistic research, in family or social life.  The attitude of the nihilist can perpetuate itself as such only if it reveals itself as a positivity at its very core.  Rejecting his own existence, the nihilist must also reject the existences which confirm it.  If he wills himself to be nothing, all mankind must also be annihilated; otherwise, by means of the presence of this world that the Other reveals he meets himself as a presence in the world.  But this thirst for destruction immediately takes the form of a desire for power.  The taste of nothingness joins the original taste of being whereby every man is first defined; he realizes himself as a being by making himself that by which nothingness comes into the world.  Thus, Nazism was both a will for power and a will for suicide at the same time.  From a historical point of view, Nazism has many other features besides; in particular, beside the dark romanticism which led Rauschning to entitle his work The Revolution of Nihilism, we also find a gloomy seriousness.  The fact is that Nazism was in the service of petit bourgeois seriousness.  But it is interesting to note that its ideology did not make this alliance impossible, for the serious often rallies to a partial nihilism, denying everything which is not its object in order to hide from itself the antinomies of action.  A rather pure example of this impassioned nihilism is the well-known case of Drieu la Rochelle.  The Empty Suitcase is the testimony of a young man who acutely felt the fact of existing as a lack of being, of not being.  This is a genuine experience on the basis of which the only possible salvation is to assume the lack, to side with the man who exists against the idea of a God who does not.  On the contrary — a novel like Gilles is proof — Drieu stubbornly persisted in his deception.  In his hatred of himself he chose to reject his condition as a man, and this led him to hate all men along with himself.  Gilles knows satisfaction only when he fires on Spanish workers and sees the flow of blood which he compares to the redeeming blood of Christ; as if the only salvation by man were the death of other men, whereby perfect negation is achieved.  It is natural that this path ended in collaboration, the ruin of a detested world being merged for Drieu with the annulment of himself.  An external failure led him to give to his life a conclusion which it called for dialectically: suicide.  The nihilist attitude manifests a certain truth.  In this attitude one experiences the ambiguity of the human condition.  But the mistake is that it defines man not as the positive existence of a lack, but as a lack at the heart of existence, whereas the truth is that existence is not a lack as such.  And if freedom is experienced in this case in the form of rejection, it is not genuinely fulfilled.  The nihilist is right in thinking that the world possesses no justification and that he himself is nothing.  But he forgets that it is up to him to justify the world and to make himself exist validly.  Instead of integrating death into life, he.  sees in it the only truth of the life which appears to him as a disguised death.  However, there is life, and the nihilist knows that he is alive.  That’s where his failure lies.  He rejects existence without managing to eliminate it.  He denies any meaning to his transcendence, and yet he transcends himself.  A man who delights in freedom can find an ally in the nihilist because they contest the serious world together, but he also sees in him an enemy insofar as the nihilist is a systematic rejection of the world and man, and if this rejection ends up in a positive desire for destruction, it then establishes a tyranny which freedom must stand up against.  The fundamental fault of the nihilist is that, challenging all given values, he does not find, beyond their ruin, the importance of that universal, absolute end which freedom itself is.  It is possible that, even in this failure, a man may nevertheless keep his taste for an existence which he originally felt as a joy.  Hoping for no justification, he will nevertheless take delight in living.  He will not turn aside from things which he does not believe in.  He will seek a pretext in them for a gratuitous display of activity.  Such a man is what is generally called an adventurer.  He throws himself into his undertakings with zest, into exploration, conquest, war, speculation, love, politics, but he does not attach himself to the end at which he aims; only to his conquest.  He likes action for its own sake.  He finds joy in spreading through the world a freedom which remains indifferent to its content.  Whether the taste for adventure appears to be based on nihilistic despair or whether it is born directly from the experience of the happy days of childhood, it always implies that freedom is realized as an independence in regard to the serious world and that, on the other hand, the ambiguity of existence is felt not as a lack but in its positive aspect.  This attitude dialectically envelops nihilism’s opposition to the serious and the opposition to nihilism by existence as such.  But, of course, the concrete history of an individual does not necessarily espouse this dialectic, by virtue of the fact that his condition is wholly present to him at each moment and because his freedom before it is, at every moment, total.  From the time of his adolescence a man can define himself as an adventurer.  The union of an original, abundant vitality and a reflective scepticism will particularly lead to this choice.  It is obvious that this choice is very close to a genuinely moral attitude.  The adventurer does not propose to be; he deliberately makes himself a lack of being; he aims expressly at existence; though engaged in his undertaking, he is at the same time detached from the goal.  Whether he succeeds or fails, he goes right ahead throwing himself into a new enterprise to which he will give himself with the same indifferent ardor.  It is not from things that he expects the justification of his choices.  Considering such behavior at the moment of its subjectivity, we see that it conforms to the requirements of ethics, and if existentialism were solipsistic, as is generally claimed, it would have to regard the adventurer as its perfect hero.  First of all, it should be noticed that the adventurer’s attitude is not always pure.  Behind the appearance of caprice, there are many men who pursue a secret goal in utter seriousness; for example, fortune or glory.  They proclaim their scepticism in regard to recognized values.  They do not take politics seriously.  They thereby allow themselves to be collaborationists in ‘41 and communists in ‘45, and it is true they don’t give a hang about the interests of the French people or the proletariat; they are attached to their career, to their success.  This arrivisme is at the very antipodes of the spirit of adventure, because the zest for existence is then never experienced in its gratuity.  It also happens that the genuine love for adventure is inextricably mixed with an attachment to the values of the serious.  Cortez and the conquistadores served God and the emperor by serving their own pleasure.  Adventure can also be shot through with passion.  The taste for conquest is often subtly tied up with the taste for possession.  Was seduction all that Don Juan liked? Did he not also like women? Or was he not even looking for a woman capable of satisfying him? But even if we consider adventure in its purity, it appears to us to be satisfying only at a subjective moment, which, in fact, is a quite abstract moment.  The adventurer always meets others along the way; the conquistador meets the Indians; the condottiere hacks out a path through blood and ruins; the explorer has comrades about him or soldiers under his orders; every Don Juan is confronted with Elviras.  Every undertaking unfolds in a human world and affects men.  What distinguishes adventure from a simple game is that the adventurer does not limit himself to asserting his existence in solitary fashion.  He asserts it in relationship to other existences.  He has to declare himself.  Two attitudes are possible.  He can become conscious of the real requirements of his own freedom, which can will itself only by destining itself to an open future, by seeking to extend itself by means of the freedom of others.  Therefore, in any case, the freedom of other men must be respected and they must be helped to free themselves.  Such a law imposes limits upon action and at the same time immediately gives it a content.  Beyond the rejected seriousness is found a genuine seriousness.  But the man who acts in this way, whose end is the liberation of himself and others, who forces himself to respect this end through the means which he uses to attain it, no longer deserves the name of adventurer.  One would not dream for example, of applying it to a Lawrence, who was so concerned about the lives of his companions and the freedom of others, so tormented by the human problems which all action raises.  One is then in the presence of a genuinely free man.  The man we call an adventurer, on the contrary, is one who remains indifferent to the content, that is, to the human meaning of his action, who thinks he can assert his own existence without taking into account that of others.  The fate of Italy mattered very little to the Italian condottiere; the massacres of the Indians meant nothing to Pizarro; Don Juan was unaffected by Elvira’s tears.  Indifferent to the ends they set up for themselves, they were still more indifferent to the means of attaining them; they cared only for their pleasure or their glory.  This implies that the adventurer shares the nihilist’s contempt for men.  And it is by this very contempt that he believes he breaks away from the contemptible condition in which those who do not imitate his pride are stagnating.  Thus, nothing prevents him from sacrificing these insignificant beings to his own will for power.  He will treat them like instruments; he will destroy them if they get in his way.  But meanwhile he appears as an enemy in the eyes of others.  His undertaking is not only an individual wager; it is a combat.  He can not win the game without making himself a tyrant or a hangman.  And as he can not impose this tyranny without help, he is obliged to serve the regime which will allow him to exercise it.  He needs money, arms, soldiers, or the support of the police and the laws.  It is not a matter of chance, but a dialectical necessity which leads the adventurer to be complacent regarding all regimes which defend the privilege of a class or a party, and more particularly authoritarian regimes and fascism.  He needs fortune, leisure, and enjoyment, and he will take these goods as supreme ends in order to be prepared to remain free in regard to any end.  Thus, confusing a quite external availability with real freedom, he falls, with a pretext of independence, into the servitude of the object.  He will range himself on the side of the regimes which guarantee him his privileges, and he will prefer those which confirm him in his contempt regarding the common herd.  He will make himself its accomplice, its servant, or even its valet, alienating a freedom which, in reality, can not confirm itself as such if it does not wear its own face.  In order to have wanted to limit it to itself, in order to have emptied it of all concrete content, he realizes it only as an abstract independence which turns into servitude.  He must submit to masters unless he makes himself the supreme master.  Favorable circumstances are enough to transform the adventurer into a dictator.  He carries the seed of one within him, since he regards mankind as indifferent matter destined to support the game of his existence.  But what he then knows is the supreme servitude of tyranny.  Hegel’s criticism of the tyrant is applicable to the adventurer to the extent that he is himself a tyrant, or at the very least an accomplice of the oppressor.  No man can save himself alone.  Doubtless, in the very heat of an action the adventurer can know a joy which is sufficient unto itself, but once the undertaking is over and has congealed behind him into a thing, it must, in order to remain alive, be animated anew by a human intention which must transcend it toward the future into recognition or admiration.  When he dies, the adventurer will be surrendering his whole life into the hands of men; the only meaning it will have will be the one they confer upon it.  He knows this since he talks about himself, often in books.  For want of a work, many desire to bequeath their own personality to posterity: at least during their lifetime they need the approval of a few faithful.  Forgotten and detested, the adventurer loses the taste for his own existence.  Perhaps without his knowing it, it seems so precious to him because of others.  It willed itself to be an affirmation, an example to all mankind.  Once it falls back upon itself, it becomes futile and unjustified.  Thus, the adventurer devises a sort of moral behavior because he assumes his subjectivity positively.  But if he dishonestly refuses to recognize that this subjectivity necessarily transcends itself toward others, he will enclose himself in a false independence which will indeed be servitude.  To the free man he will be only a chance ally in whom one can have no confidence; he will easily become an enemy.  His fault is believing that one can do something for oneself without others and even against them.  The passionate man is, in a way, the antithesis of the adventurer.  In him too there is a sketch of the synthesis of freedom and its content.  But in the adventurer it is the content which does not succeed in being genuinely fulfilled.  Whereas in the passionate man it is subjectivity which fails to fulfill itself genuinely.  What characterizes the passionate man is that he sets up the object as an absolute, not, like the serious man, as a thing detached from himself, but as a thing disclosed by his subjectivity.  There are transitions between the serious and passion.  A goal which was first willed in the name of the serious can become an object of passion; inversely, a passionate attachment can wither into a serious relationship.  But real passion asserts the subjectivity of its involvement.  In amorous passion particularly, one does not want the beloved being to be admired objectively; one prefers to think her unknown, unrecognized; the lover thinks that his appropriation of her is greater if he is alone in revealing her worth.  That is the genuine thing offered by all passion.  The moment of subjectivity therein vividly asserts itself, in its positive form, in a movement toward the object.  It is only when passion has been degraded to an organic need that it ceases to choose itself.  But as long as it remains alive it does so because subjectivity is animating it; if not pride, at least complacency and obstinacy.  At the same time that it is an assumption of this subjectivity, it is also a disclosure of being.  It helps populate the world with desirable objects, with exciting meanings.  However, in the passions which we shall call maniacal, to distinguish them from the generous passions, freedom does not find its genuine form.  The passionate man seeks possession; he seeks to attain being.  The failure and the hell which he creates for himself have been described often enough.  He causes certain rare treasures to appear in the world, but he also depopulates it.  Nothing exists outside of his stubborn project; therefore nothing can induce him to modify his choices.  And having involved his whole life with an external object which can continually escape him, he tragically feels his dependence.  Even if it does not definitely disappear, the object never gives itself.  The passionate man makes himself a lack of being not that there might be being, but in order to be.  And he remains at a distance; he is never fulfilled.  That is why though the passionate man inspires a certain admiration, he also inspires a kind of horror at the same time.  One admires the pride of a subjectivity which chooses its end without bending itself to any foreign law and the precious brilliance of the object revealed by the force of this assertion.  But one also considers the solitude in which this subjectivity encloses itself as injurious.  Having withdrawn into an unusual region of the world, seeking not to communicate with other men, this freedom is realized only as a separation.  Any conversation, any relationship with the passionate man is impossible.  In the eyes of those who desire a communion of freedom, he therefore appears as a stranger, an obstacle.  He opposes an opaque resistance to the movement of freedom which wills itself infinite.  The passionate man is not only an inert facticity.  He too is on the way to tyranny.  He knows that his will emanates only from him, but he can nevertheless attempt to impose it upon others.  He authorizes himself to do that by a partial nihilism.  Only the object of his passion appears real and full to him.  All the rest are insignificant.  Why not betray, kill, grow violent? It is never nothing that one destroys.  The whole universe is perceived only as an ensemble of means or obstacles through which it is a matter of attaining the thing in which one has engaged his being.  Not intending his freedom for men, the passionate man does not recognize them as freedoms either.  He will not hesitate to treat them as things.  If the object of his passion concerns the world in general, this tyranny becomes fanaticism.  In all fanatical movements there exists an element of the serious.  The values invented by certain men in a passion of hatred, fear, or faith are thought and willed by others as given realities.  But there is no serious fanaticism which does not have a passional base, since all adhesion to the serious world is brought about by repressed tendencies and complexes.  Thus, maniacal passion represents a damnation for the one who chooses it, and for other men it is one of the forms of separation which disunites freedoms.  It leads to struggle and oppression.  A man who seeks being far from other men, seeks it against them at the same time that he loses himself.  Yet, a conversion can start within passion itself.  The cause of the passionate man’s torment is his distance from the object; but he must accept it instead of trying to eliminate it.  It is the condition within which the object is disclosed.  The individual will then find his joy in the very wrench which separates him from the being of which he makes himself a lack.  Thus, in the letters of Made-moiselle de Lespinasse there is constant passing from grief to the assumption of this grief.  The lover describes her tears and her tortures, but she asserts that she loves this unhappiness.  It is also a source of delight for her.  She likes the other to appear as another through her separation.  It pleases her to exalt, by her very suffering, that strange existence which she chooses to set up as worthy of any sacrifice.  It is only as something strange, forbidden, as something free, that the other is revealed as an other.  And to love him genuinely is to love him in his otherness and in that freedom by which he escapes.  Love is then renunciation of all possession, of all confusion.  One renounces being in order that there may be that being which one is not.  Such generosity, moreover, can not be exercised on behalf of any object whatsoever.  One can not love a pure thing in its independence and its separation, for the thing does not have positive independence.  If a man prefers the land he has discovered to the possession of this land, a painting or a statue to their material presence, it is insofar as they appear to him as possibilities open to other men.  Passion is converted to genuine freedom only if one destines his existence to other existences through the being — whether thing or man — at which he aims, without hoping to entrap it in the destiny of the in-itself.  Thus, we see that no existence can be validly fulfilled if it is limited to itself.  It appeals to the existence of others.  The idea of such a dependence is frightening, and the separation and multiplicity of existants raises highly disturbing problems.  One can understand that men who are aware of the risks and the inevitable element of failure involved in any engagement in the world attempt to fulfill themselves outside of the world.  Man is permitted to separate himself from this world by contemplation, to think about it, to create it anew.  Some men, instead of building their existence upon the indefinite unfolding of time, propose to assert it in its eternal aspect and to achieve it as an absolute.  They hope, thereby, to surmount the ambiguity of their condition.  Thus, many intellectuals seek their salvation either in critical thought or creative activity.  We have seen that the serious contradicts itself by the fact that not everything can be taken seriously.  It slips into a partial nihilism.  But nihilism is unstable.  It tends to return to the positive.  Critical thought attempts to militate everywhere against all aspects of the serious but without foundering in the anguish of pure negation.  It sets up a superior, universal, and timeless value, objective truth.  And, correlatively, the critic defines himself positively as the independence of the mind.  Crystallizing the negative movement of the criticism of values into a positive reality, he also crystallizes the negativity proper to all mind into a positive presence.  Thus, he thinks that he himself escapes all earthly criticism.  He does not have to choose between the highway and the native, between America and Russia, between production and freedom.  He understands, dominates, and rejects, in the name of total truth, the necessarily partial truths which every human engagement discloses.  But ambiguity is at the heart of his very attitude, for the independent man is still a man with his particular situation in the world, and what he defines as objective truth is the object of his own choice.  His criticisms fall into the world of particular men.  He docs not merely describe.  He takes sides.  If he does not assume the subjectivity of his judgment, he is inevitably caught in the trap of the serious.  Instead of the independent mind he claims to be, he is only the shameful servant of a cause to which he has not chosen to rally.  The artist and the writer force themselves to surmount existence in another way.  They attempt to realize it as an absolute.  What makes their effort genuine is that they do not propose to attain being.  They distinguish themselves thereby from an engineer or a maniac.  It is existence which they are trying to pin down and make eternal.  The word, the stroke, the very marble indicate the object insofar as it is an absence.  Only, in the work of art the lack of being returns to the positive.  Time is stopped, clear forms and finished meanings rise up.  In this return, existence is confirmed and establishes its own justification.  This is what Kant said when he defined art as “a finality without end.” By virtue of the fact that he has thus set up an absolute object, the creator is then tempted to consider himself as absolute.  He justifies the world and therefore thinks he has no need of anyone to justify himself.  If the work becomes an idol whereby the artist thinks that he is fulfilling himself as being, he is closing himself up in the universe of the serious; he is falling into the illusion which Hegel exposed when he described the race of “intellectual animals.” There is no way for a man to escape from this world.  It is in this world that — avoiding the pitfalls we have just pointed out — he must realize himself morally.  Freedom must project itself toward its own reality through a content whose value it establishes.  An end is valid only by a return to the freedom which established it and which willed itself through this end.  But this will implies that freedom is not to be engulfed in any goal; neither is it to dissipate itself vainly without aiming at a goal.  It is not necessary for the subject to seek to be, but it must desire that there be being.  To will oneself free and to will that there be being are one and the same choice, the choice that man makes of himself as a presence in the world.  We can neither say that the free man wants freedom in order to desire being, nor that he wants the disclosure of being by freedom.  These are two aspects of a single reality.  And whichever be the one under consideration, they both imply the bond of each man with all others.  This bond does not immediately reveal itself to everybody.  A young man wills himself free.  He wills that there be being.  This spontaneous liberality which casts him ardently into the world can ally itself to what is commonly called egoism.  Often the young man perceives only that aspect of his relationship to others whereby others appear as enemies.  In the preface to The Inner Experience Georges Bataille emphasizes very forcefully that each individual wants to be All.  He sees in every other man and particularly in those whose existence is asserted with most brilliance, a limit, a condemnation of himself.  “Each consciousness,” said Hegel, “seeks the death of the other.” And indeed at every moment others are stealing the whole world away from me.  The first movement is to hate them.  But this hatred is naive, and the desire immediately struggles against itself.  If I were really everything there would be nothing beside me; the world would be empty.  There would be nothing to possess, and I myself would be nothing.  If he is reasonable, the young man immediately understands that by taking the world away from me, others also give it to me, since a thing is given to me only by the movement which snatches it from me.  To will that there be being is also to will that there be men by and for whom the world is endowed with human significations.  One can reveal the world only on a basis revealed by other men.  No project can be defined except by its interference with other projects.  To make being “be” is to communicate with others by means of being.  This truth is found in another form when we say that freedom can not will itself without aiming at an open future.  The ends which it gives itself must be unable to be transcended by any reflection, but only the freedom of other men can extend them beyond our life.  I have tried to show in Pyrrhus and Cineas that every man needs the freedom of other men and, in a sense, always wants it, even though he may be a tyrant; the only thing he fails to do is to assume honestly the consequences of such a wish.  Only the freedom of others keeps each one of us from hardening in the absurdity of facticity.  And if we are to believe the Christian myth of creation, God himself was in agreement on this point with the existentialist doctrine since, in the words of an anti-fascist priest, “He had such respect for man that He created him free.” Thus, it can be seen to what an extent those people are mistaken — or are lying — who try to make of existentialism a solipsism, like Nietzsche, would exalt the bare will to power.  According to this interpretation, as widespread as it is erroneous, the individual, knowing himself and choosing himself as the creator of his own values, would seek to impose them on others.  The result would be a conflict of opposed wills enclosed in their solitude.  But we have seen that, on the contrary, to the extent that passion, pride, and the spirit of adventure lead to this tyranny and its conflicts, existentialist ethics condems them; and it does so not in the name of an abstract law, but because, if it is true that every project emanates from subjectivity, it is also true that this subjective movement establishes by itself a surpassing of subjectivity.  Man can find a justification of his own existence only in the existence of other men.  Now, he needs such a justification; there is no escaping it.  Moral anxiety does not come to man from without; he finds within himself the anxious question, “What’s the use?” Or, to put it better, he himself is this urgent interrogation.  He flees it only by fleeing himself, and as soon as he exists he answers.  It may perhaps be said that it is for himself that he is mora’, and that such an attitude is egotistical.  But there is no ethics against which this charge, which immediately destroys itself, can not be leveled; for how can I worry about what does not concern me? I concern others and they concern me.  There we have an irreducible truth.  The me-others relationship is as indissoluble as the subject-object relationship.  At the same time the other charge which is often directed at existentialism also collapses: of being a formal doctrine, incapable of proposing any content to the freedom which it wants engaged.  To will oneself free is also to will others free.  This will is not an abstract formula.  It points out to each person concrete action to be achieved.  But the others are separate, even opposed, and the man of good will sees concrete and difficult problems arising in his relations with them.  It is this positive aspect of morality that we are now going to examine.  The Ethics of Ambiguity III 1.  THE AESTHETIC ATTITUDE Thus, every man has to do with other men.  The world in which he engages himself is a human world in which each object is penetrated with human meanings.  It is a speaking world from which solicitations and appeals rise up.  This means that, through this world, each individual can give his freedom a concrete content.  He must disclose the world with the purpose of further disclosure and by the same movement try to free men, by means of whom the world takes on meaning.  But we shall find here the same objection that we met when we examined the abstract moment of individual ethics.  If every man is free, he can not will himself free.  Likewise the objection will be raised that he can will nothing for another since that other is free in all circumstances; men are always disclosing being, in Buchenwald as well as in the blue isles of the Pacific, in hovels as well as in palaces; something is always happening in the world, and in the movement of keeping being at a distance, can one not consider its different transformations with a detached joy, or find reasons for acting? No solution is better or worse than any Other.  We may call this attitude aesthetic because the one who adopts it claims to have no other relation with the world than that of detached contemplation; outside of time and far from men, he faces history, which he thinks he does not belong to, like a pure beholding; this impersonal version equalizes all situations; it apprehends them only in the indifference of their differences; it excludes any preference.  Thus, the lover of historical works is present at the birth and the downfall of Athens, Rome, and Byzantium with the same serene passion.  The tourist considers the arena of the Coliseum, the Latifundia of Syracuse, the thermal baths, the palaces, the temples, the prisons, and the churches with the same tranquil curiosity: these things existed, that is enough to satisfy him.  Why not also consider with impartial interest those that exist today? One finds this temptation among many Italians who are weighed down by a magical and deceptive past; the present already seems to them like a future past.  Wars, civil disputes, invasions and slavery have succeeded one another in their land.  Each moment of that tormented history is contradicted by the following one; and yet in the very midst of this vain agitation there arose domes, statues, bas-reliefs, paintings and palaces which have remained intact through the centuries and which still enchant the men of today.  One can imagine an intellectual Florentine being skeptical about the great uncertain movements which are stirring up his country and which will die out as did the seethings of the centuries which have gone by: as he sees it, the important thing is merely to understand the temporary events and through them to cultivate that beauty which perishes not.  Many Frenchmen also sought relief in this thought in 1940 and the years which followed.  “Let’s try to take the point of view of history,” they said upon learning that the Germans had entered Paris.  And during the whole occupation certain intellectuals sought to keep “aloof from the fray” and to consider impartially contingent facts which did not concern them.  But we note at once that such an attitude appears in moments of discouragement and confusion; in fact, it is a position of withdrawal, a way of fleeing the truth of the present.  As concerns the past, this eclecticism is legitimate; we are no longer in a live situation in regard to Athens, Sparta, or Alexandria, and the very idea of a choice has no meaning.  But the present is not a potential past; it is the moment of choice and action; we can not avoid living it through a project; and there is no project which is purely contemplative since one always projects himself toward something, toward the future; to put oneself “outside” is still a way of living the inescapable fact that one is inside; those French intellectuals who, in the name of history, poetry, or art, sought to rise above the drama of the age, were willynilly its actors; more or less explicitly, they were playing the occupier’s game.  Likewise, the Italian aesthete, occupied in caressing the marbles and bronzes of Florence, is playing a political role in the life of his country by his very inertia.  One can not justify all that is by asserting that everything may equally be the object of contemplation, since man never contemplates: he does.  It is for the artist and the writer that the problem is raised in a particularly acute and at the same time equivocal manner, for then one seeks to set up the indifference of human situations not in the name of pure contemplation, but of a definite project: the creator projects toward the work of art a subject which he justifies insofar as it is the matter of this work; any subject may thus be admitted, a massacre as well as a masquerade.  This aesthetic justification is sometimes so striking that it betrays the author’s aim; let us say that a writer wants to communicate the horror inspired in him by children working in sweatshops; he produces so beautiful a book that, enchanted by the tale, the style, and the images, we forget the horror of the sweatshops or even start admiring it.  Will we not then be inclined to think that if death, misery, and injustice can be transfigured for our delight, it is not an evil for there to be death, misery, and injustice? But here too we must not confuse the present with the past.  With regard to the past, no further action is possible.  There have been war, plague, scandal, and treason, and there is no way of our preventing their having taken place; the executioner became an executioner and the victim underwent his fate as a victim without us; all that we can do is to reveal it, to integrate it into the human heritage, to raise it to the dignity of the aesthetic existence which bears within itself its finality; but first this history had to occur: it occurred as scandal, revolt, crime, or sacrifice, and we were able to try to save it only because it first offered us a form.  Today must also exist before being confirmed in its existence: it exists only as an engagement and a commitment.  If we first considered the world as an object to be manifested, if we thought that it was saved by this destination in such a way that everything about it already seemed justified and that there was no more of it to reject, then there would also be nothing to say about it, for no form would take shape in it; it is revealed only through rejection, desire, hate and love.  In order for the artist to have a world to express he must first be situated in this world, oppressed or oppressing, resigned or rebellious, a man among men.  But at the heart of his existence he finds the exigence which is common to all men; he must first will freedom within himself and universally; he must try to conquer it: in the light of this project situations are graded and reasons for acting are made manifest.  2.  FREEDOM AND LIBERATION One of the chief objections leveled against existentialism is that the precept “to will freedom” is only a hollow formula and offers no concrete content for action.  But that is because one has begun by emptying the word freedom of its concrete meaning; we have already seen that freedom realizes itself only by engaging itself in the world: to such an extent that man’s project toward freedom is embodied for him in definite acts of behavior.  To will freedom and to will to disclose being are one and the same choice; hence, freedom takes a positive and constructive step which causes being to pass to existence in a movement which is constantly surpassed.  Science, technics, art, and philosophy are indefinite conquests of existence over being; it is by assuming themselves as such that they take on their genuine aspect; it is in the light of this assumption that the word progress finds its veridical meaning.  It is not a matter of approaching a fixed limit: absolute Knowledge or the happiness of man or the perfection of beauty; all human effort would then be doomed to failure, for with each step forward the horizon recedes a step; for man it is a matter of pursuing the expansion of his existence and of retrieving this very effort as an absolute.  Science condemns itself to failure when, yielding to the infatuation of the serious, it aspires to attain being, to contain it, and to possess it; but it finds its truth if it considers itself as a free engagement of thought in the given, aiming, at each discovery, not at fusion with the thing, but at the possibility of new discoveries; what the mind then projects is the concrete accomplishment of its freedom.  The attempt is sometimes made to find an objective justification of science in technics; but ordinarily the mathematician is concerned with mathematics and the physicist with physics, and not with their applications.  And, furthermore, technics itself is not objectively justified; if it sets up as absolute goals the saving of time and work which it enables us to realize and the comfort and luxury which it enables us to have access to, then it appears useless and absurd, for the time that one gains can not be accumulated in a store house; it is contradictory to want to save up existence, which, the fact is, exists only by being spent, and there is a good case for showing that airplanes, machines, the telephone, and the radio do not make men of today happier than those of former times.  But actually it is not a question of giving men time and happiness, it is not a question of stopping the movement of life: it is a question of fulfilling it.  If technics is attempting to make up for this lack, which is at the very heart of existence, it fails radically; but it escapes all criticism if one admits that, through it, existence, far from wishing to repose in the security of being, thrusts itself ahead of itself in order to thrust itself still farther ahead, that it aims at an indefinite disclosure of being by the transformation of the thing into an instrument and at the opening of ever new possibilities for man.  As for art, we have already said that it should not attempt to set up idols; it should reveal existence as a reason for existing; that is really why Plato, who wanted to wrest man away from the earth and assign him to the heaven of Ideas, condemned the poets; that is why every humanism on the other hand, crowns them with laurels.  Art reveals the transitory as an absolute; and as the transitory existence is perpetuated through the centuries, art too, through the centuries, must perpetuate this never-to-be-finished revelation.  Thus, the constructive activities of man take on a valid meaning only when they are assumed as a movement toward freedom; and reciprocally, one sees that such a movement is concrete: discoveries, inventions, industries, culture, paintings, and books people the world concretely and open concrete possibilities to men.  Perhaps it is permissible to dream of a future when men will know no other use of their freedom than this free unfurling of itself; constructive activity would be possible for all; each one would be able to aim positively through his projects at his own future.  But today the fact is that there are men who can justify their life only by a negative action.  As we have already seen, every man transcends himself.  But it happens that this transcendence is condemned to fall uselessly back upon itself because it is cut off from its goals.  That is what defines a situation of oppression.  Such a situation is never natural: man is never oppressed by things; in any case, unless he is a naive child who hits stones or a mad prince who orders the sea to be thrashed, he does not rebel against things, but only against other men.  The resistance of the thing sustains the action of man as air sustains the flight of the dove; and by projecting himself through it man accepts its being an obstacle; he assumes the risk of a setback in which he does not see a denial of his freedom.  The explorer knows that he may be forced to withdraw before arriving at his goal; the scientist, that a certain phenomenon may remain obscure to him; the technician, that his attempt may prove abortive: these withdrawals and errors are another way of disclosing the world.  Certainly, a material obstacle may cruelly stand in the way of an undertaking: floods, earthquakes, grasshoppers, epidemics and plague are scourges; but here we have one of the truths of Stoicism: a man must assume even these misfortunes, and since he must never resign himself in favor of any thing, no destruction of a thing will ever be a radical ruin for him; even his death is not an evil since he is man only insofar as he is mortal: he must assume it as the natural limit of his life, as the risk implied by every step.  Only man can be an enemy for man; only he can rob him of the meaning of his acts and his life because it also belongs only to him alone to confirm it in its existence, to recognize it in actual fact as a freedom.  It is here that the Stoic distinction between “things which do not depend upon us” and those which “depend upon us” proves to be insufficient: for “we” is legion and not an individual; each one depends upon others, and what happens to me by means of others depends upon me as regards its meaning; one does not submit to a war or an occupation as he does to an earthquake: he must take sides for or against, and the foreign wills thereby become allied or hostile.  It is this interdependence which explains why oppression is possible and why it is hateful.  As we have seen, my freedom, in order to fulfill itself, requires that it emerge into an open future: it is other men who open the future to me, it is they who, setting up the world of tomorrow, define my future; but if, instead of allowing me to participate in this constructive movement, they oblige me to consume my transcendence in vain, if they keep me below the level which they have conquered and on the basis of which new conquests will be achieved, then they are cutting me off from the future, they are changing me into a thing.  Life is occupied in both perpetuating itself and in surpassing itself; if all it does is maintain itself, then living is only not dying, and human existence is indistinguishable from an absurd vegetation; a life justifies itself only if its effort to perpetuate itself is integrated into its surpassing and if this surpassing has no other limits than those which the subject assigns himself.  Oppression divides the world into two clans: those who enlighten mankind by thrusting it ahead of itself and those who are condemned to mark time hopelessly in order merely to support the collectivity; their life is a pure repetition of mechanical gestures; their leisure is just about sufficient for them to regain their strength; the oppressor feeds himself on their transcendence and refuses to extend it by a free recognition.  The oppressed has only one solution: to deny the harmony of that mankind from which an attempt is made to exclude him, to prove that he is a man and that he is free by revolting against the tyrants.  In order to prevent this revolt, one of the ruses of oppression is to camouflage itself behind a natural situation since, after all, one can not revolt against nature.  When a conservative wishes to show that the proletariat is not oppressed, he declares that the present distribution of wealth is a natural fact and that there is thus no means of rejecting it; and doubtless he has a good case for proving that, strictly speaking, he is not stealing from the worker the product of his labor, since the word theft supposes social conventions which in other respects authorizes this type of exploitation; but what the revolutionary means by this word is that the present regime is a human fact.  As such, it has to be rejected.  This rejection cuts off the will of the oppressor, in his turn, from the future toward which he was hoping to thrust himself alone: another future is substituted, that of revolution.  The struggle is not one of words and ideologies; it is real and concrete: if it is this future which triumphs, and not the former, then it is the oppressed who is realized as a positive and open freedom and the oppressor who becomes an obstacle and a thing.  There are thus two ways of surpassing the given: it is something quite different from taking a trip or escaping from prison.  In these two cases the given is present in its surpassing; but in one case it is present insofar as it is accepted, in the other insofar as rejected, and that makes a radical difference.  Hegel has confused these two movements with the ambiguous term “aufheben”; and the whole structure of an optimism which denies failure and death rests on this ambiguity; that is what allows one to regard the future of the world as a continuous and harmonious development; this confusion is the source and also the consequence; it is a perfect epitome of that idealistic and verbose flabbiness with which Marx charged Hegel and to which he opposed a realistic toughness.  Revolt is not integrated into the harmonious development of the world; it does not wish to be integrated but rather to explode at the heart of the world and to break its continuity.  It is no accident if Marx defined the attitude of the proletariat not positively but negatively: he does not show it as affirming itself or as seeking to realize a classless society, but rather as first attempting to put an end to itself as a class.  And it is precisely because it has no other issue than a negative one that this situation must be eliminated.  All men are interested in this elimination, the oppressor as well as the oppressed, as Marx himself has said, for each one needs to have all men free.  There are cases where the slave does not know his servitude and where it is necessary to bring the seed of his liberation to him from the outside: his submission is not enough to justify the tyranny which is imposed upon him.  The slave is submissive when one has succeeded in mystifying him in such a way that his situation does not seem to him to be imposed by men, but to be immediately given by nature, by the gods, by the powers against whom revolt has no meaning; thus, he does not accept his condition through a resignation of his freedom since he can not even dream of any other; and in his relationships with his friends, for example, he can live as a free and moral man within this world where his ignorance has enclosed him.  The conservative will argue from this that this peace should not be disturbed; it is not necessary to give education to the people or comfort to the natives of the colonies; the “ringleaders” should be suppressed; that is the meaning of an old story of Maurras: there is no need to awaken the sleeper, for that would be to awaken him to unhappiness.  Certainly it is not a question of throwing men in spite of themselves, under the pretext of liberation, into a new world, one which they have not chosen, on which they have no grip.  The proponents of slavery in the Carolinas had a good case when they showed the conquerors old negro slaves who were be- wildered by a freedom which they didn’t know what to do with and who cried for their former masters; these false liberations — though in a certain sense they are inevitable — overwhelm those who are their victims as if they were a new blow of blind fate.  What must be done is to furnish the ignorant slave with the means of transcending his situation by means of revolt, to put an end to his ignorance.  We know that the problem of the nineteenth-century socialists was precisely to develop a class consciousness in the proletariat; we see in the life of Flora Tristan, for example, how thankless such a task was: what she wanted for the workers had first to be wanted without them.  “But what right does one have to want something for others?” asks the conservative, who meanwhile regards the workingman or the native as “a grown-up child” and who does not hesitate to dispose of the child’s will.  Indeed, there is nothing more arbitrary than intervening as a stranger in a destiny which is not ours: one of the shocking things about charity — in the civic sense of the word — is that it is practised from the outside, according to the caprice of the one who distributes it and who is detached from the object.  But the cause of freedom is not that of others more than it is mine: it is universally human.  If I want the slave to become conscious of his servitude, it is both in order not to be a tyrant myself — for any abstention is complicity, and complicity in this case is tyranny — and in order that new possibilities might be opened to the liberated slave and through him to all men.  To want existence, to want to disclose the world, and to want men to be free are one and the same will.  Moreover, the oppressor is lying if he claims that the oppressed positively wants oppression; he merely abstains from not wanting it because he is unaware of even the possibility of rejection.  All that an external action can propose is to put the oppressed in the presence of his freedom: then he will decide positively and freely.  The fact is that he decides against oppression, and it is then that the movement of emancipation really begins.  For if it is true that the cause of freedom is the cause of each one, it is also true that the urgency of liberation is not the same for all; Marx has rightly said that it is only to the oppressed that it appears as immediately necessary.  As for us, we do not believe in a literal necessity but in a moral exigence; the oppressed can fulfill his freedom as a man only in revolt, since the essential characteristic of the situation against which he is rebelling is precisely its prohibiting him from any positive development; it is only in social and political struggle that his transcendence passes beyond to the infinite.  And certainly the proletarrian is no more naturally a moral man than another; he can flee from his freedom, dissipate it, vegetate without desire, and give himself up to an inhuman myth; and the trick of “enlightened” capitalism is to make him forget about his concern with genuine justification, offering him, when he leaves the factory where a mechanical job absorbs his transcendence, diversions in which this transcendence ends by petering out: there you have the politics of the American employing class which catches the worker in the trap of sports, “gadgets,” autos, and frigidaires.  On the whole, however, he has fewer temptations of betrayal than the members of the privileged classes because the satisfying of his passions, the taste for adventure, and the satisfactions of social seriousness are denied him.  And in particular, it is also possible for the bourgeois and the intellectual to use their freedom positively at the same time as they can cooperate in the struggle against oppression: their future is not barred.  That is what Ponge, for example, suggests when he writes that he is producing “post-revolutionary” literature.  The writer, as well as the scientist and the technician, has the possibility of realizing, before the revolution is accomplished, this re-creation of the world which should be the task of every man if freedom were no longer enchained anywhere.  Whether or not it is desirable to anticipate the future, whether men have to give up the positive use of their freedom as long as the liberation of all has not yet been achieved, or whether, on the contrary, any human fulfillment serves the cause of man, is a point about which revolutionary politics itself is still hesitating.  Even in the Soviet Union itself the relation between the building of the future and the present struggle seems to be defined in very different ways according to the moment and the circumstances.  It is also a matter wherein each individual has to invent his solution freely.  In any case, we can assert that the oppressed is more totally engaged in the struggle than those who, though at one with him in rejecting his servitude, do not experience it; but also that, on the other hand, every man is affected by this struggle in so essential a way that he can not fulfill himself morally without taking part in it.  The problem is complicated in practice by the fact that today oppression has more than one aspect: the Arabian fellah is oppressed by both the sheiks and the French and English administration; which of the two enemies is to be combatted? The interests of the French proletariat are not the same as those of the natives in the colonies: which are to be served? But here the question is political before being moral: we must end by abolishing all suppression; each one must carry on his struggle in connection with that of the other and by integrating it into the general pattern.  What order should be followed? What tactics should be adopted? It is a matter of opportunity and efficiency.  For each one it also depends upon his individual situation.  It is possible that he may be led to sacrifice temporarily a cause whose success is subordinate to that of a cause whose defense is more urgent; on the other hand, it is possible that one may judge it necessary to maintain the tension of revolt against a situation to which one does not wish to consent at any price: thus, during the war, when Negro leaders in America were asked to drop their own claims for the sake of the general interest, Richard Wright refused; he thought that even in time of war his cause had to be defended.  In any case, morality requires that the combatant be not blinded by the goal which he sets up for himself to the point of falling into the fanaticism of seriousness or passion.  The cause which he serves must not lock itself up and thus create a new element of separation: through his own struggle he must seek to serve the universal cause of freedom.  At once the oppressor raises an objection: under the pretext of freedom, he says, there you go oppressing me in turn; you deprive me of my freedom.  It is the argument which the Southern slaveholders opposed to the abolitionists, and we know that the Yankees were so imbued with the principles of an abstract democracy that they did not grant that they had the right to deny the Southern planters the freedom to own slaves; the Civil War broke out with a completely formal pretext.  We smile at such scruples; yet today America still recognizes more or less implicitly that Southern whites have the freedom to lynch negroes.  And it is the same sophism which is innocently displayed in the newspapers of the P.  R.  L.  (Parti Republicain de la Liberte) and, more or less subtly, in all conservative organs.  When a party promises the directing classes that it will defend their freedom, it means quite plainly that it demands that they have the freedom of exploiting the working class.  A claim of this kind does not outrage us in the name of abstract justice; but a contradiction is dishonestly concealed there.  For a freedom wills itself genuinely only by willing itself as an indefinite movement through the freedom of others; as soon as it withdraws into itself, it denies itself on behalf of some object which it prefers to itself: we know well enough what sort of freedom the P.  R.  L.  demands: it is property, the feeling of possession, capital, comfort, moral security.  We have to respect freedom only when it is intended for freedom, not when it strays, flees itself, and resigns itself.  A freedom which is interested only in denying freedom must be denied.  And it is not true that the recognition of the freedom of others limits my own freedom: to be free is not to have the power to do anything you like; it is to be able to surpass the given toward an open future; the existence of others as a freedom defines my situation and is even the condition of my own freedom.  I am oppressed if I am thrown into prison, but not if I am kept from throwing my neighbor into prison.  Indeed, the oppressor himself is conscious of this sophism; he hardly dares to have recourse to it; rather than make an unvarnished demand for freedom to oppress he is more apt to present himself as the defender of certain values.  It is not in his own name that he is fighting, but rather in the name of civilization, of institutions, of monuments, and of virtues which realize objectively the situation which he intends to maintain; he declares that all these things are beautiful and good in themselves; he defends a past which has assumed the icy dignity of being against an uncertain future whose values have not yet been won; this is what is well expressed by the label “conservative.” As some people are curators of a museum or a collection of medals, others make themselves the curators of the given world; stressing the sacrifices that are necessarily involved in all change, they side with what has been over against what has not yet been.  It is quite certain that the surpassing of the past toward the future always demands sacrifices; to claim that in destroying an old quarter in order to build new houses on its ruins one is preserving it dialectically is a play on words; no dialectic can restore the old port of Marseilles; the past as something not surpassed, in its flesh and blood presence, has completely vanished.  All that a stubborn optimism can claim is that the past does not concern us in this particular and fixed form and that we have sacrificed nothing in sacrificing it; thus, many revolutionaries consider it healthy to refuse any attachment to the past and to profess to scorn monuments and traditions.  A left-wing journalist who was fuming impatiently in a street of Pompeii said, “What are we doing here? We’re wasting our time.” This attitude is self-confirming; let us turn away from the past, and there no longer remains any trace of it in the present, or for the future; the people of the Middle Ages had so well forgotten antiquity that there was no longer anyone who even had a desire to know something about it.  One can live without Greek, without Latin, without cathedrals, and without history.  Yes, but there are many other things that one can live without; the tendency of man is not to reduce himself but to increase his power.  To abandon the past to the night of facticity is a way of depopulating the world.  I would distrust a humanism which was too indifferent to the efforts of the men of former times; if the disclosure of being achieved by our ancestors does not at all move us, why be so interested in that which is taking place today; why wish so ardently for future realizations? To assert the reign of the human is to acknowledge man in the past as well in the future.  The Humanists of the Renaissance are an example of the help to be derived by a movement of liberation from being rooted in the past; no doubt the study of Greek and Latin does not have this living force in every age; but in any case, the fact of having a past is part of the human condition; if the world behind us were bare, we would hardly be able to see anything before us but a gloomy desert.  We must try, through our living projects, to turn to our own account that freedom which was undertaken in the past and to integrate it into the present world.  But on the other hand, we know that if the past concerns us, it does so not as a brute fact, but insofar as it has human signification; if this signification can be recognized only by a project which refuses the legacy of the past, then this legacy must be refused; it would be absurd to uphold against man a datum which is precious only insofar as the freedom of man is expressed in it.  There is one country where the cult of the past is erected into a system more than anywhere else: it is the Portugal of today; but it is at the cost of a deliberate contempt for man.  Salazar has had brand-new castles built, at great expense, on all the hills where there were ruins standing, and at Obidos he had no hesitation in appropriating for this restoration the funds that were to go to the maternity hospital, which, as a result, had to be closed; on the outskirts of Coimbre where a children’s community was to be set up, he spent so much money having the different types of old Portuguese houses reproduced on a reduced scale that barely four children could be lodged in this monstrous village.  Dances, songs, local festivals, and the wearing of old regional costumes are encouraged everywhere: they never open a school.  Here we see, in its extreme form, the absurdity of a choice which prefers the Thing to Man from whom alone the Thing can receive its value.  We may be moved by dances, songs, and regional costumes because these inventions represent the only free accomplishment which was allowed the peasants amidst the hard conditions under which they formerly lived; by means of these creations they tore themselves away from their servile work, transcended their situation, and asserted themselves as men before the beasts of burden.  Wherever these festivals still exist spontaneously, where they have retained this character, they have their meaning and their value.  But when they are ceremoniously reproduced for the edification of indifferent tourists, they are no more than a boring documentary, even an odious mystification.  It is a sophism to want to maintain by coercion things which derive their worth from the fact that men attempted through them to escape from coercion.  In like manner, all those who oppose old lace, rugs, peasant coifs, picturesque houses, regional costumes, hand-made cloth, old language, etcetera, to social evolution know very well that they are dishonest: they themselves do not much value the present reality of these things, and most of the time their lives clearly show it.  To be sure, they treat those who do not recognize the unconditional value of an Alencon point as ignoramuses; but at heart they know that these objects are less precious in themselves than as the manifestation of the civilization which they represent.  They are crying up the patience and the submission of industrious hands which were one with their needle as much as they are the lace.  We also know that the Nazis made very handsome bindings and lampshades out of human skin.  Thus, oppression can in no way justify itself in the name of the content which it is defending and which it dishonestly sets up as an idol.  Bound up with the subjectivity which established it, this content requires its own surpassing.  One does not love the past in its living truth if he insists on preserving its hardened and mummified forms.  The past is an appeal; it is an appeal toward the future which sometimes can save it only by destroying it.  Even though this destruction may be a sacrifice, it would be a lie to deny it: since man wants there to be being, he can not renounce any form of being without regret.  But a genuine ethics does not teach us either to sacrifice it or deny it: we must assume it.  The oppressor does not merely try to justify himself as a conserver.  Often he tries to invoke future realizations; he speaks in the name of the future.  Capitalism sets itself up as the regime which is most favorable to production; the colonist is the only one capable of exploiting the wealth which the native would leave fallow.  Oppression tries to defend itself by its utility.  But we have seen that it is one of the lies of the serious mind to attempt to give the word “useful” an absolute meaning; nothing is useful if it is not useful to man; nothing is useful to man if the latter is not in a position to define his own ends and values, if he is not free.  Doubtless an oppressive regime can achieve constructions which will serve man: they will serve him only from the day that he is free to use them; as long as the reign of the oppressor lasts, none of the benefits of oppression is a real benefit.  Neither in the past nor in the future can one prefer a thing to Man, who alone can establish the reason for all things.  Finally, the oppressor has a good case for showing that respect for freedom is never without difficulty, and perhaps he may even assert that one can never respect all freedoms at the same time.  But that simply means that man must accept the tension of the struggle, that his liberation must actively seek to perpetuate itself, without aiming at an impossible state of equilibrium and rest; this does not mean that he ought to prefer the sleep of slavery to this incessant conquest.  Whatever the problems raised for him, the setbacks that he will have to assume, and the difficulties with which he will have to struggle, he must reject oppression at any cost.  3.  THE ANTINOMIES OF ACTION As we have seen, if the oppressor were aware of the demands of his own freedom, he himself should have to denounce oppression.  But he is dishonest; in the name of the serious or of his passions, of his will for power or of his appetites, he refuses to give up his privileges.  In order for a liberating action to be a thoroughly moral action, it would have to be achieved through a conversion of the oppressors: there would then be a reconciliation of all freedoms.  But no one any longer dares to abandon himself today to these Utopian reveries.  We know only too well that we can not count upon a collective conversion.  However, by virtue of the fact that the oppressors refuse to co-operate in the affirmation of freedom, they embody, in the eyes of all men of good will, the absurdity of facticity; by calling for the triumph of freedom over facticity, ethics also demands that they be suppressed; and since their subjectivity, by definition, escapes our control, it will be possible to act only on their objective presence; others will here have to be treated like things, with violence; the sad fact of the separation of men will thereby be confirmed.  Thus, here is the oppressor oppressed in turn; and the men who do violence to him in their turn become masters, tyrants, and executioners: in revolting, the oppressed are metamorphosed into a blind force, a brutal fatality; the evil which divides the world is carried out in their own hearts.  And doubtless it is not a question of backing out of these consequences, for the ill-will of the oppressor imposes upon each one the alternative of being the enemy of the oppressed if he is not that of their tyrant; evidently, it is necessary to choose to sacrifice the one who is an enemy of man; but the fact is that one finds himself forced to treat certain men as things in order to win the freedom of all.  A freedom which is occupied in denying freedom is itself so outrageous that the outrageousness of the violence which one practises against it is almost cancelled out: hatred, indignation, and anger (which even the Marxist cultivates, despite the cold impartiality of the doctrine) wipe out all scruples.  But the oppressor would not be so strong if he did not have accomplices among the oppressed themselves; mystification is one of the forms of oppression; ignorance is a situation in which man may be enclosed as narrowly as in a prison; as we have already said, every individual may practise his freedom inside his world, but not everyone has the means of rejecting, even by doubt, the values, taboos, and prescriptions by which he is surrounded; doubtless, respectful minds take the object of their respect for their own; in this sense they are responsible for it, as they are responsible for their presence in the world: but they are not guilty if their adhesion is not a resignation of their freedom.  When a young sixteen-year old Nazi died crying, “Heil Hitler!” he was not guilty, and it was not he whom we hated but his masters.  The desirable thing would be to re-educate this misled youth; it would be necessary to expose the mystification and to put the men who are its victims in the presence of their freedom.  But the urgency of the struggle forbids this slow labor.  We are obliged to destroy not only the oppressor but also those who serve him, whether they do so out of ignorance or out of constraint.  As we have also seen, the situation of the world is so complex that one can not fight everywhere at the same time and for everyone.  In order to win an urgent victory, one has to give up the idea, at least temporarily, of serving certain valid causes; one may even be brought to the point of fighting against them.  Thus, during the course of the last war, no Anti-fascist could have wanted the revolts of the natives in the British Empire to be successful; on the contrary, these revolts were supported by the Fascist regimes; and yet, we can not blame those who, considering their emancipation to be the more urgent action, took advantage of the situation to obtain it.  Thus, it is possible, and often it even happens, that one finds himself obliged to oppress and kill men who are pursuing goals whose validity one acknowledges himself.  But that is not the worst thing to be said for violence.  It not only forces us to sacrifice the men who are in our way, but also those who are fighting on our side, and even ourselves.  Since we can conquer our enemies only by acting upon their facticity, by reducing them to things, we have to make ourselves things; in this struggle in which wills are forced to confront each other through their bodies, the bodies of our allies, like those of our opponents are exposed to the same brutal hazard: they will be wounded, killed, or starved.  Every war, every revolution, demands the sacrifice of a generation, of a collectivity, by those who undertake it.  And even outside of periods of crisis when blood flows, the permanent possibility of violence can constitute between nations and classes a state of veiled warfare in which individuals are sacrificed in a permanent way.  Thus one finds himself in the presence of the paradox that no action can be generated for man without its being immediately generated against men.  This obvious truth, which is universally known, is, however, so bitter that the first concern of a doctrine of action is ordinarily to mask this element of failure that is involved in any undertaking.  The parties of oppression beg the question; they deny the value of what they sacrifice in such a way that they find that they are sacrificing nothing.  Passing dishonestly from the serious to nihilism, they set up both the unconditioned value of their end and the insignificance of the men whom they are using as instruments.  High as it may be, the number of victims is always measurable; and each one taken one by one is never anything but an individual: yet, through time and space, the triumph of the cause embraces the infinite, it interests the whole collectivity.  In order to deny the outrage it is enough to deny the importance of the individual, even though it be at the cost of this collectivity: it is everything, he is only a zero.  In one sense the individual, as a matter of fact, is not very much, and we can understand the misanthrope who in 1939 declared: “After all, when you look at people one by one, it doesn’t seem so awful a thing to make war upon them.” Reduced to pure facticity, congealed in his immanence, cut off from his future, deprived of his transcendence and of the world which that transcendence discloses, a man no longer appears as anything more than a thing among things which can be subtracted from the collectivity of other things without its leaving upon the earth any trace of its absence.  Multiply this paltry existence by thousands of copies and its insignificance remains; mathematics also teaches us that zero multipled by any finite number remains zero.  It is even possible that the wretchedness of each element is only further affirmed by this futile expansion.  Horror is sometimes self-destructive before the photographs of the charnel-houses of Buchenwald and Dachau and of the ditches strewn with bones; it takes on the aspect of indifference; that decomposed, that animal flesh seems so essentially doomed to decay that one can no longer even regret that it has fulfilled its destiny; it is when a man is alive that his death appears to be an outrage, but a corpse has the stupid tranquillity of trees and stones: those who have done it say that it is easy to walk on a corpse and still easier to walk over a pile of corpses; and it is the same reason that accounts for the callousness described by those deportees who escaped death: through sickness, pain, hunger, and death, they no longer saw their comrades and themselves as anything more than an animal horde whose life or desires were no longer justified by anything, whose very revolts were only the agitations of animals.  In order to remain capable of perceiving man through these humiliated bodies one had to be sustained by political faith, intellectual pride, or Christian charity.  That is why the Nazis were so systematically relentless in casting into abjection the men they wanted to destroy: the disgust which the victims felt in regard to themselves stifled the voice of revolt and justified the executioners in their own eyes.  All oppressive regimes become stronger through the degradation of the oppressed.  In Algeria I have seen any number of colonists appease their conscience by the contempt in which they held the Arabs who were crushed with misery: the more miserable the latter were, the more contemptible they seemed, so much so that there was never any room for remorse.  And the truth is that certain tribes in the south were so ravaged by disease and famine that one could no longer feel either rebellious or hopeful regarding them; rather, one wished for the death of those unhappy creatures who have been reduced to so elemental an animality that even the maternal instict has been suppressed in them.  Yet, with all this sordid resignation, there were children who played and laughed; and their smile exposed the lie of their oppressors: it was an appeal and a promise; it projected a future before the child, a man’s future.  If, in all oppressed countries, a child’s face is so moving, it is not that the child is more moving or that he has more of a right to happiness than the others: it is that he is the living affirmation of human transcendence: he is on the watch, he is an eager hand held out to the world, he is a hope, a project.  The trick of tyrants is to enclose a man in the immanence of his facticity and to try to forget that man is always, as Heidegger puts it, “infinitely more than what he would be if he were reduced to being what he is;” man is a being of the distances, a movement toward the future, a project.  The tyrant asserts himself as a transcendence; he considers others as pure immanences: he thus arrogates to himself the right to treat them like cattle.  We see the sophism on which his conduct is based: of the ambiguous condition which is that of all men, he retains for himself the only aspect of a transcendence which is capable of justifying itself; for the others, the contingent and unjustified aspect of immanence.  But if that kind of contempt for man is convenient, it is also dangerous; the feeling of abjection can confirm men in a hopeless resignation but can not incite them to the struggle and sacrifice which is consented to with their life; this was seen in the time of the Roman decadence when men lost their zest for life and the readiness to risk it.  In any case, the tyrant himself does not openly set up this contempt as a universal principle: it is the Jew, the negro, or the native whom he encloses in his immanence; with his subordinates and his soldiers he uses different language.  For it is quite clear that if the individual is a pure zero, the sum of those zeros which make up the collectivity is also a zero: no undertaking has any importance, no defeat as well as no victory.  In order to appeal to the devotion of his troops, the chief or the authoritarian party will utilize a truth which is the opposite of the one which sanctions their brutal oppression: namely, that the value of the individual is asserted only in his surpassing.  This is one of the aspects of the doctrine of Hegel which the dictatorial regimes readily make use of.  And it is a point at which fascist ideology and Marxist ideology converge.  A doctrine which aims at the liberation of man evidently can not rest on a contempt for the individual; but it can propose to him no other salvation than his subordination to the collectivity.  The finite is nothing if it is not its transition to the infinite; the death of an individual is not a failure if it is integrated into a project which surpasses the limits of life, the substance of this life being outside of the individual himself, in the class, in the socialist State; if the individual is taught to consent to his sacrifice, the latter is abolished as such, and the soldier who has renounced himself in favor of his cause will die joyfully; in fact, that is how the young Hitlerians died.  We know how many edifying speeches this philosophy has inspired: it is by losing oneself that one finds himself, by dying that one fulfills his life, by accepting servitude that one realizes his freedom; all leaders of men preach in this vein.  And if there are any who refuse to heed this language, they are wrong, they are cowards: as such, they are worthless, they aren’t worth anyone’s bothering with them.  The brave man dies gaily, of his own free will; the one who rejects death deserves only to die.  There you have the problem elegantly resolved.  But one may ask whether this convenient solution is not self-contesting.  In Hegel the individual is only an abstract moment in the History of absolute Mind.  This is explained by the first intuition of the system which, identifying the real and the rational, empties the human world of its sensible thickness; if the truth of the here and now is only Space and Time, if the truth of one’s cause is its passage into the other, then the attachment to the individual substance of life is evidently an error, an inadequate attitude.  The essential moment of Hegelian ethics is the moment when consciousnesses recognize one another;in this operation the other is recognized as identical with me, which means that in myself it is the universal truth of my self which alone is recognized; so individuality is denied, and it can no longer reappear except on the natural and contingent plane; moral salvation will lie in my surpassing toward that other who is equal to myself and who in turn will surpass himself toward another.  Hegel himself recognizes that if this passage continued indefinitely, Totality would never be achieved, the real would peter out in the same measure: one can not, without absurdity, indefinitely sacrifice each generation to the following one; human history would then be only an endless succession of negations which would never return to the positive; all action would be destruction and life would be a vain flight.  We must admit that there will be a recovery of the real and that all sacrifices will find their positive form within the absolute Mind.  But this does not work without some difficulty.  The Mind is a subject; but who is a subject? After Descartes how can we ignore the fact that subjectivity radically signifies separation? And if it is admitted, at the cost of a contradiction, that the subject will be the men of the future reconciled, it must be clearly recognized that the men of today who turn out to have been the substance of the real, and not subjects, remain excluded forever from this reconciliation.  Furthermore, even Hegel retreats from the idea of this motionless future; since Mind is restlessness, the dialectic of struggle and conciliation can never be stopped: the future which it envisages is not the perpetual peace of Kant but an indefinite state of war.  It declares that this war will no longer appear as a temporary evil in which each individual makes a gift of himself to the State; but it is precisely at this point that there is a bit of sleight-of-hand: for why would he agree to this gift since the State can not be the achieving of the real, Totality recovering itself? The whole system seems like a huge mystification, since it subordinates all its moments to an end term whose coming it dares not set up; the individual renounces himself; but no reality in favor of which he can renounce himself is ever affirmed or recovered.  Through all this learned dialectic we finally come back to the sophism which we exposed: if the individual is nothing, society can not be something.  Take his substance away from him, and the State has no more substance; if he has nothing to sacrifice, there is nothing before him to sacrifice to.  Hegelian fullness immediately passes into the nothingness of absence.  And the very grandeur of that failure makes this truth shine forth: only the subject can justify his own existence; no external subject, no object, can bring him salvation from the outside.  He can not be regarded as a nothing, since the consciousness of all things is within him.  Thus, nihilistic pessimism and rationalistic optimism fail in their effort to juggle away the bitter truth of sacrifice: they also eliminate all reasons for wanting it.  Someone told a young invalid who wept because she had to leave her home, her occupations, and her whole past life, “Get cured.  The rest has no importance.” “But if nothing has any importance,” she answered, “what good is it to get cured?” She was right.  In order for this world to have any importance, in order for our undertaking to have a meaning and to be worthy of sacrifices, we must affirm the concrete and particular thickness of this world and the individual reality of our projects and ourselves.  This is what democratic societies understand; they strive to confirm citizens in the feeling of their individual value; the whole ceremonious apparatus of baptism, marriage, and burial is the collectivity’s homage to the individual; and the rites of justice seek to manifest society’s respect for each of its members considered in his particularity.  After or during a period of violence when men are treated like objects, one is astonished, even irritated, at seeing human life rediscover, in certain cases, a sacred character.  Why those hesitations of the courts, those long drawn-out trials, since men died by the million, like animals, since the very ones being judged coldly massacred them? The reason is that once the period of crisis, in which the democracies themselves, whether they liked it or not, had to resort to blind violence, has passed, they aim to re-establish the individual within his rights; more than ever they must restore to their members the sense of their dignity, the sense of the dignity of each man, taken one by one; the soldier must become a citizen again so that the city may continue to subsist as such, may continue to deserve one’s dedicating oneself to it.  But if the individual is set up as a unique and irreducible value, the word sacrifice regains all its meaning; what a man loses in renouncing his plans, his future, and his life no longer appears as a negligible thing.  Even if he decides that in order to justify his life he must consent to limiting its course, even if he accepts dying, there is a wrench at the heart of this acceptance, for freedom demands both that it recover itself as an absolute and that it prolong its movement indefinitely: it is through this indefinite movement that it desires to come back to itself and to confirm itself; now, death puts an end to his drive; the hero can transcend death toward a future fulfillment, but he will not be present in that future; this must be understood if one wishes to restore to heroism its true worth: it is neither natural nor easy; the hero may overcome his regret and carry out his sacrifice; the latter is none the less an absolute renunciation.  The death of those to whom we are attached by particular ties will also be consented to as an individual and irreducible misfortune.  A collectivist conception of man does not concede a valid existence to such sentiments as love, tenderness, and friendship; the abstract identity of individuals merely authorizes a comradeship between them by means of which each one is likened to each of the others.  In marching, in choral singing, in common work and struggle, all the others appear as the same; nobody ever dies.  On the contrary, if individuals recognize themselves in their differences, individual relations are established among them, and each one becomes irreplaceable for a few others.  And violence does not merely provoke in the world the wrench of the sacrifice to which one has consented; it is also undergone in revolt and refusal.  Even the one who desires a victory and who knows that it has to be paid for will wonder: why with my blood rather than with another’s? Why is it my son who is dead? And we have seen that every struggle obliges us to sacrifice people whom our victory does not concern, people who, in all honesty, reject it as a cataclysm: these people will die in astonishment, anger or despair.  Undergone as a misfortune, violence appears as a crime to the one who practices it.  That is why Saint-Just, who believed in the individual and who knew that all authority is violence, said with somber lucidity, “No one governs innocently.” We may well assume that not all those who govern have the courage to make such a confession; and furthermore it might be dangerous for them to make it too loudly.  They try to mask the crime from themselves; at least they try to conceal it from the notice of those who submit to their law.  If they can not totally deny it, they attempt to justify it.  The most radical justification would be to demonstrate that it is necessary: it then ceases to be a crime, it becomes fatality.  Even if an end is posited as necessary, the contingency of the means renders the chief’s decisions arbitrary, and each individual suffering appears as unjustified: why this bloody revolution instead of slow reforms? And who will dare to designate the victim who is anonymously demanded by the general plan? On the contrary, if only one way shows itself to be possible, if the unrolling of history is fatal, there is no longer any place for the anguish of choice, or for regret, or for outrage; revolt can no longer surge up in any heart.  This is what makes historical materialism so reassuring a doctrine; the troublesome idea of a subjective caprice or an objective chance is thereby eliminated.  The thought and the voice of the directors merely reflect the fatal exigences of History.  But in order that this faith be living and efficacious, it is necessary that no reflection mediatize the subjectivity of the chiefs and make it appear as such; if the chief considers that he does not simply reflect the given situation but that he is interpreting it, he becomes a prey to anguish: who am I to believe in myself? And if the soldier’s eyes open, he too asks: who is he to command me? Instead of a prophet, he sees nothing more than a tyrant.  That is why every authoritarian party regards thought as a danger and reflection as a crime; it is by means of thought that crime appears as such in the world.  This is one of the meanings of Koestler’s Darkness at Noon.  Roubatchov easily slips into confession because he feels that hesitation and doubt are the most radical, the most unpardonable of faults; they undermine the world of objectivity much more than does an act of capricious disobedience.  Yet, however cruel the yoke may be, in spite of the purges, murders, and deportations, every regime has opponents: there are reflection, doubt, and contestation.  And even if the opponent is in the wrong, his error brings to light a truth, namely, that there is a place in this world for error and subjectivity; whether he is right or wrong, he triumphs; he shows that the men who are in power may also be mistaken.  And furthermore, the latter know it; they know that they hesitate and that their decisions are risky.  The doctrine of necessity is much more a weapon than a faith; and if they use it, they do so because they know well enough that the soldier may act otherwise than he does, otherwise than the way they want him to, that he may disobey; they know well enough that he is free and that they are fettering his freedom.  It is the first sacrifice that they impose upon him: in order to achieve the liberation of men he has to give up his own freedom, even his freedom of thought.  In order to mask the violence, what they do is to have recourse to a new violence which even invades his mind.  Very well, replies the partisan who is sure of his aims, but this violence is useful.  And the justification which he here invokes is that which, in the most general way, inspires and legitimizes all action.  From conservatives to revolutionaries, through idealistic and moral vocabularies or realistic and positive ones, the outrageousness of violence is excused in the name of utility.  It does not much matter that the action is not fatally commanded by anterior events as long as it is called for by the proposed end; this end sets up the means which are subordinated to it; and thanks to this subordination, one can perhaps not avoid sacrifice but one can legitimize it: this is what is important to the man of action; like Saint-Just, he accepts the loss of his innocence.  It is the arbitrariness of the crime that is repugnant to him more than the crime itself.  If the sacrifices which have been assented to find their rational place within the enterprise, one escapes from the anguish of decision and from remorse.  But one has to win out; defeat would change the murders and destruction into unjustified outrage, since they would have been carried out in vain; but victory gives meaning and utility to all the misfortunes which have helped bring it about.  Such a position would be solid and satisfactory if the word useful had an absolute meaning in itself; as we have seen, the characteristic of the spirit of seriousness is precisely to confer a meaning upon it by raising the Thing or the Cause to the dignity of an unconditioned end.  The only problem then raised is a technical problem; the means will be chosen according to their effectiveness, their speed, and their economy; it is simply a question of measuring the relationships of the factors of time, cost, and probability of success.  Furthermore, in war-time discipline spares the subordinates the problems of such calculations; they concern only the staff.  The soldier does not call into question cither the aim or the means of attaining it: he obeys without any discussion.  However, what distinguishes war and politics from all other techniques is that the material that is employed is a human material.  Now human efforts and lives can no more be treated as blind instruments than human work can be treated as simple merchandise; at the same time as he is a means for attaining an end, man is himself an end.  The word useful requires a complement, and there can be only one: man himself.  And the most disciplined soldier would mutiny if skillful propaganda did not persuade him that he is dedicating himself to the cause of man: to his cause.  But is the cause of Man that of each man? That is what utilitarian ethics has been striving to demonstrate since Hegel; if one wishes to give the word useful a universal and absolute meaning, it is always a question of reabsorbing each man into the bosom of mankind; it is said that despite the weaknesses of the flesh and that particular fear which each one experiences in the face of his particular death, the real interest of each one is mingled with the general interest.  And it is true that each is bound to all; but that is precisely the ambiguity of his condition: in his surpassing toward others, each one exists absolutely as for himself; each is interested in the liberation of all, but as a separate existence engaged in his own projects.  So much so that the terms “useful to Man,” “useful to this man,” do not overlap.  Universal, absolute man exists nowhere.  From this angle, we again come upon the same antinomy: the only justification of sacrifice is its utility; but the useful is what serves Man.  Thus, in order to serve some men we must do disservice to others.  By what principle are we to choose between them? It must again be called to mind that the supreme end at which man must aim is his freedom, which alone is capable of establishing the value of every end; thus, comfort, happiness, all relative goods which human projects define, will be subordinated to this absolute condition of realization.  The freedom of a single man must count more than a cotton or rubber harvest; although this principle is not respected in fact, it is usually recognized theoretically.  But what makes the problem so difficult is that it is a matter of choosing between the negation of one freedom or another: every war supposes a discipline, every revolution a dictatorship, every political move a certain amount of lying; action implies all forms of enslaving, from murder to mystification.  Is it therefore absurd in every case? Or, in spite of everything, are we able to find, within the very outrage that it implies, reasons for wanting one thing rather than another? One generally takes numerical considerations into account by a strange compromise which clearly shows that every action treats men both as a means and as an end, as an external object and as an inwardness; it is better to save the lives of ten men than of only one.  Thus, one treats man as an end, for to set up quantity as a value is to set up the positive value of each unit; but it is setting it up as a quantifiable value, thus, as an externality.  I have known a Kantian rationalist who pas sionately maintained that it is as inmoral to choose the death of a single man as to let ten thousand die; he was right in the sense that in each murder the outrage is total; ten thousand dead — there are never ten thousand copies of a single death; no multiplication is relevant to subjectivity.  But he forgot that for the one who had the decision to make men are given, nevertheless, as objects that can be counted; it is therefore logical, though this logic implies an outrageous absurdity, to prefer the salvation of the greater number.  Moreover, this position of the problem is rather abstract, for one rarely bases a choice on pure quantity.  Those men among whom one hesitates have functions in society.  The general who is sparing of the lives of his soldiers saves them as human material that it is useful to save for tomorrow’s battles or for the reconstruction of the country; and he sometimes condemns to death thousands of civilians whose fate he is not concerned with in order to spare the lives of a hundred soldiers or ten specialists.  An extreme case is the one David Rousset describes in The Days of Our Death: the S.S.  obliged the responsible members of the concentration camps to designate which prisoners were to go to the gas chambers.  The politicians agreed to assume this responsibility because they thought that they had a valid principle of selection: they protected the politicians of their party because the lives of these men who were devoted to a cause which they thought was just seemed to them to be the most useful to preserve.  We know that the communists have been widely accused of this partiality; however, since one could in no way escape the atrocity of these massacres, the only thing to do was to try, as far as possible, to rationalize it.  It seems as if we have hardly advanced, for we come back, in the end, to the statement that what appears as useful is to sacrifice the less useful men to the more useful.  But even this shift from useful to useful will enlighten us: the complement of the word useful is the word man; but it is also the word future.  It is man insofar as he is, according to the formula of Ponge, “the future of man.” Indeed, cut off from his transcendence, reduced to the facticity of his presence, an individual is nothing; it is by his project that he fulfills himself, by the end at which he aims that he justifies himself; thus, this justification is always to come.  Only the future can take the present for its own and keep it alive by surpassing it.  A choicewill become possible in the light of the future, which is the meaning of tomorrow because the present appears as the facticity which must be transcended toward freedom.  No action is conceivable without this sovereign affirmation of the future.  But we still have to agree upon what underlies this word.  4.  THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE The word future has two meanings corresponding to the two aspects of the ambiguous condition of man which is lack of being and which is existence; it alludes to both being and existence.  When I envisage my future, I consider that movement which, prolonging my existence of today, will fulfill my present projects and will surpass them toward new ends: the future is the definite direction of a particular transcendence and it is so closely bound up with the present that it composes with it a single temporal form; this is the future which Heidegger considered as a reality which is given at each moment.  But through the centuries men have dreamed of another future in which it might be granted them to retrieve themselves as beings in Glory, Happiness, or Justice; this future did not prolong the present; it came down upon the world like a cataclysm announced by signs which cut the continuity of time: by a Messiah, by meteors, by the trumpets of the Last Judgment.  By transporting the kingdom of God to heaven, Christians have almost stripped it of its temporal character, although it was promised to the believer only at the end of his life.  It was the anti-Christian humanism of the eighteenth century which brought the myth down to earth again.  Then, through the idea of progress, an idea of the future was elaborated in which its two aspects fused: the future appeared both as the meaning of our transcendence and as the immobility of being; it is human, terrestial, and the resting-place of things.  It is in this form that it is hesitantly reflected in the systems of Hegel and of Comte.  It is in this form that it is so often invoked today as a unity of the World or as a finished socialist State.  In both cases the Future appears as both the infinite and as Totality, as number and as unity of conciliation; it is the abolition of the negative, it is fulness, happiness.  One might surmise that any sacrifice already made might be claimed in its name.  However great the quantity of men sacrificed today, the quantity that will profit by their sacrifice is infinitely greater; on the other hand, in the face of the positivity of the future, the present is only the negative which must be eliminated as such: only by dedicating itself to this positivity can the negative henceforth return to the positive.  The present is the transitory existence which is made in order to be abolished: it retrieves itself only by transcending itself toward the permanence of future being; it is only as an instrument, as a means, it is only by its efficacity with regard to the coming of the future that the present is validly realized: reduced to itself it is nothing, one may dispose of it as he pleases.  That is the ultimate meaning of the formula: the end justifies the means: all means are authorized by their very indifference.  Thus, some serenely think that the present oppression has no importance if, through it, the World can be fulfilled as such: then, within the harmonious equilibrium of work and wealth, oppression will be wiped out by itself.  Others serenely think that the present dictatorship of a party with its lies and violence has no importance if, by means of it, the socialist State is realized: arbitrariness and crime will then disappear forever from the face of the earth.  And still others think more sloppily that the shilly-shallyings and the compromises have no importance since the future will turn out well and, in some way or other, will muddle along into victory.  Those who project themselves toward a Future-Thing and submerge their freedom in it find the tranquillity of the serious.  However, we have seen that, despite the requirements of his system, even Hegel does not dare delude himself with the idea of a stationary future; he admits that, mind being restlessness, the struggle will never cease.  Marx did not consider the coming of the socialist state as an absolute result, but as the end of a pre-history on the basis of which real history begins.  However, it would be sufficient, in order for the myth of the future to be valid, for this history to be conceivable as a harmonious development where reconciled men would fulfill themselves as a pure positivity; but this dream is not permitted since man is originally a negativity.  No social upheaval, no moral conversion can eliminate this lack which is in his heart; it is by making himself a lack of being that man exists, and positive existence is this lack assumed but not eliminated; we can not establish upon existence an abstract wisdom which, turning itself away from being, would aim at only the harmony itself of the existants: for it is then the absolute silence of the in-itself which would close up around this negation of negativity; without this particular movement which thrusts him toward the future man would not exist.  But then one can not imagine any reconciliation of transcendences: they do not have the indifferent docility of a pure abstraction; they are concrete and concretely compete with others for being.  The world which they reveal is a battle-field where there is no neutral ground and which cannot be divided up into parcels: for each individual project is asserted through the world as a whole.  The fundamental ambiguity of the human condition will always open up to men the possibility of opposing choices; there will always be within them the desire to be that being of whom they have made themselves a lack, the flight from the anguish of freedom; the plane of hell, of struggle, will never be eliminated; freedom will never be given; it will always have to be won: that is what Trotsky was saying when he envisaged the future as a permanent revolution.  Thus, there is a fallacy hidden in that abuse of language which all parties make use of today to justify their politics when they declare that the world is still at war.  If one means by that that the struggle is not over, that the world is a prey to opposed interests which affront each other violently, he is speaking the truth; but he also means that such a situation is abnormal and calls for abnormal behavior; the politics that it involves can impugn every moral principle, since it has only a provisional form: later on we shall act in accordance with truth and justice.  To the idea of present war there is opposed that of a future peace when man will again find, along with a stable situation, the possibility of a morality.  But the truth is that if division and violence define war, the world has always been at war and always will be; if man is waiting for universal peace in order to establish his existence validly, he will wait indefinitely: there will never be any other future.  It is possible that some may challenge this assertion as being based upon debatable ontological presuppositions; it should at least be recognized that this harmonious future is only an uncertain dream and that in any case it is not ours.  Our hold on the future is limited; the movement of expansion of existence requires that we strive at every moment to amplify it; but where it stops our future stops too; beyond, there is nothing more because nothing more is disclosed.  From that formless night we can draw no justification of our acts, it condemns them with the same indifference; wiping out today’s errors and defeats, it will also wipe out its triumphs; it can be chaos or death as well as paradise: perhaps men will one day return to barbarism, perhaps one day the earth will no longer be anything but an icy planet.  In this perspective all moments are lost in the indistinctness of nothingness and being.  Man ought not entrust the care of his salvation to this uncertain and foreign future: it is up to him to assure it within his own existence; this existence is conceivable, as we have said, only as an affirmation of the future, but of a human future, a finite future.  It is difficult today to safeguard this sense of finiteness.  The Greek cities and the Roman republic were able to will themselves in their finiteness because the infinite which invested them was for them only darkness; they died because of this ignorance, but they also lived by it.  Today, however, we are having a hard time living because we are so bent on outwitting death.  We are aware that the whole world is interested in each of our undertakings and this spatial enlargement of our projects also governs their temporal dimension; by a paradoxical symmetry, whereas an individual accords great value to one day of his life, and a city to one year, the interests of the World are computed in centuries; the greater the human density that one envisages, the more the viewpoint of externality wins over that of internality, and the idea of externality carries with it that of quantity.  Thus, the scales of measurement have changed; space and time have expanded about us: today it is a small matter that a million men and a century seem to us only a provisional moment; yet, the individual is not touched by this transformation, his life keeps the same rhythm, his death does not retreat before him; he extends his control of the world by instruments which enable him to devour distances and to multiply the output of his effort in time; but he is always only one.  However, instead of accepting his limits, he tries to do away with them.  He aspires to act upon everything and by knowing everything.  Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries there developed the dream of a universal science which, manifesting the solidarity of the parts of the whole also admitted a universal power; it was a dream “dreamed by reason,” as Valery puts it, but which was none the less hollow, like all dreams.  For a scientist who would aspire to know everything about a phenomenon would dissolve it within the totality; and a man who would aspire to act upon the totality of the Universe would see the meaning of all action vanish.  Just as the infinity spread out before my gaze contracts above my head into a blue ceiling, so my transcendence heaps up in the distance the opaque thickness of the future; but between sky and earth there is a perceptional field with its forms and colors; and it is in the interval which separates me today from an unforeseeable future that there are meanings and ends toward which to direct my acts.  As soon as one introduces the presence of the finite individual into the world, a presence without which there is no world, finite forms stand out through time and space.  And in reverse, though a landscape is not only a transition but a particular object, an event is not only a passage but a particular reality.  If one denies with Hegel the concrete thickness of the here and now in favor of universal space-time, if one denies the separate consciousness in favor of Mind, one misses with Hegel the truth of the world.  It is no more necessary to regard History as a rational totality than to regard the Universe as such.  Man, mankind, the universe, and history are, in Sartre’s expression, “detotalized totalities,” that is, separation does not exclude relation, nor vice-versa.  Society exists only by means of the existence of particular individuals; likewise, human adventures stand out against the background of time, each finite to each, though they are all open to the infinity of the future and their individual forms thereby imply each other without destroying each other.  A conception of this kind does not contradict that of a historical unintelligibility; for it is not true that the mind has to choose between the contingent absurdity of the discontinuous and the rationalistic necessity of the continuous; on the contrary, it is part of its function to make a multiplicity of coherent ensembles stand out against the unique background of the world and, inversely, to comprehend these ensembles in the perspective of an ideal unity of the world.  Without raising the question of historical comprehension and causality it is enough to recognize the presence of intelligible sequences within temporal forms so that forecasts and consequently action may be possible.  In fact, whatever may be the philosophy we adhere to, whether our uncertainty manifests an objective and fundamental contingency or whether it expresses our subjective ignorance in the face of a rigorous necessity, the practical attitude remains the same; we must decide upon the opportuneness of an act and attempt to measure its effectiveness without knowing all the factors that are present.  Just as the scientist, in order to know a phenomenon, does not wait for the light of completed knowledge to break upon it; on the contrary, in illuminating the phenomenon, he helps establish the knowledge: in like manner, the man of action, in order to make a decision, will not wait for a perfect knowledge to prove to him the necessity of a certain choice; he must first choose and thus help fashion history.  A choice of this kind is no more arbitrary than a hypothesis; it excludes neither reflection nor even method; but it is also free, and it implies risks that must be assumed as such.  The movement of the mind, whether it be called thought or will, always starts up in the darkness.  And at bottom it matters very little, practically speaking, whether there is a Science of history or not, since this Science can come to light only at the end of the future and since at each particular moment we must, in any case, maneuver in a state of doubt.  The communists themselves admit that it is subjectively possible for them to be mistaken despite the strict dialectic of History.  The latter is not revealed to them today in its finished form; they are obliged to foresee its development, and this foresight may be erroneous.  Thus, from the political and tactical point of view there will be no difference between a doctrine of pure dialectical necessity and a doctrine which leaves room for contingency; the difference is of a moral order.  For, in the first case one admits a retrieval of each moment in the future, and thus one does not aspire to justify it by itself; in the second case, each undertaking, involving only a finite future, must be lived in its finiteness and considered as an absolute which no unknown time will ever succeed in saving.  In fact, the one who asserts the unity of history also recognizes that distinct ensembles stand out within it; and the one who emphasizes the particularity of these ensembles admits that they all project against a single horizon; just as for all there exist both individuals and a collectivity; the affirmation of the collectivity over against the individual is opposed, not on the plane of fact, but on the moral plane, to the assertion of a collectivity of individuals each existing for himself.  The case is the same in what concerns time and its moments, and just as we believe that by denying each individual one by one, one eliminates the collectivity, we think that if man gives himself up to an indefinite pursuit of the future he will lose his existence without ever recovering it; he then resembles a madman who runs after his shadow.  The means, it is said, will be justified by the end; but it is the means which define it, and if it is contradicted at the moment that it is set up, the whole enterprise sinks into absurdity.  In this way the attitude of England in regard to Spain, Greece, and Palestine is defended with the pretext that she must take up position against the Russian menace in order to save, along with her own existence, her civilization and the values of democracy; but a democracy which defends itself only by acts of oppression equivalent to those of authoritarian regimes, is precisely denying all these values; whatever the virtues of a civilization may be, it immediately belies them if it buys them by means of injustice and tyranny.  Inversely, if the justifying end is thrown ahead to the farthermost end of a mythical future, it is no longer a reflection upon the means; being nearer and clearer, the means itself becomes the goal aimed at; it blocks the horizon without, however, being deliberately wanted.  The triumph of Russia is proposed as a means of liberating the international proletariat; but has it not become an absolute end for all Stalinists? The end justifies the means only if it remains present, if it is completely disclosed in the course of the present enterprise.  And as a matter of fact, if it is true that men seek in the future a guarantee of their success, a negation of their failures, it is true that they also feel the need of denying the indefinite flight of time and of holding their present between their hands.  Existence must be asserted in the present if one does not want all life to be defined as an escape toward nothingness.  That is the reason societies institute festivals whose role is to stop the movement of transcendence, to set up the end as an end.  The hours following the liberation of Paris, for example, were an immense collective festival exalting the happy and absolute end of that particular history which was precisely the occupation of Paris.  There were at the moment worried spirits who were already surpassing the present toward future difficulties; they refused to rejoice under the pretext that new problems were going to come up immediately; but this ill-humor was met with only among those who had very slight wish to see the Germans defeated.  All those who had made this combat their combat, even if only by the sincerity of their hopes, also regarded the victory as an absolute victory, whatever the future might be.  Nobody was so naive as not to know that unhappiness would soon find other forms; but this particular unhappiness was wiped off the earth, absolutely.  That is the modern meaning of the festival, private as well as public.  Existence attempts in the festival to confirm itself positively as existence.  That is why, as Bataille has shown, it is characterized by destruction; the ethics of being is the ethics of saving: by storing up, one aims at the stationary plenitude of the in-itself, existence, on the contrary, is consumption; it makes itself only by destroying; the festival carries out this negative movement in order to indicate clearly its independence in relationship to the thing: one eats, drinks, lights fires, breaks things, and spends time and money; one spends them for nothing.  The spending is also a matter of establishing a communication of the existants, for it is by the movement of recognition which goes from one to the other that existence is confirmed; in songs, laughter, dances, eroticism, and drunkenness one seeks both an exaltation of the moment and a complicity with other men.  But the tension of existence realized as a pure negativity can not maintain itself for long; it must be immediately engaged in a new undertaking, it must dash off toward the future.  The moment of detachment, the pure affirmation of the subjective present are only abstractions; the joy becomes exhausted, drunkenness subsides into fatigue, and one finds himself with his hands empty because one can never possess the present: that is what gives festivals their pathetic and deceptive character.  One of art’s roles is to fix this passionate assertion of existence in a more durable way: the festival is at the origin of the theatre, music, the dance, and poetry.  In telling a story, in depicting it, one makes it exist in its particularity with its beginning and its end, its glory or its shame; and this is the way it actually must be lived.  In the festival, in art, men express their need to feel that they exist absolutely.  They must really fulfill this wish.  What stops them is that as soon as they give the word “end” its double meaning of goal and fulfillment they clearly perceive this ambiguity of their condition, which is the most fundamental of all: that every living movement is a sliding toward death.  But if they are willing to look it in the face they also discover that every movement toward death is life.  In the past people cried out, “The king is dead, long live the king;” thus the present must die so that it may live; existence must not deny this death which it carries in its heart; it must assert itself as an absolute in its very finiteness; man fulfills himself within the transitory or not at all.  He must regard his undertakings as finite and will them absolutely.  It is obvious that this finiteness is not that of the pure instant; we have said that the future was the meaning and the substance of all action; the limits can not be marked out a priori; there are projects which define the future of a day or of an hour; and there are others which are inserted into structures capable of being developed through one, two, or several centuries, and thereby they have a concrete hold on one or two or several centuries.  When one fights for the emancipation of oppressed natives, or the socialist revolution, he is obviously aiming at a long range goal; and he is still aiming at it concretely, beyond his own death, through the movement, the league, the institutions, or the party that he has helped set up.  What we maintain is that one must not expect that this goal be justified as a point of departure of a new future; insofar as we no longer have a hold on the time which will flow beyond its coming, we must not expect anything of that time for which we have worked; other men will have to live its joys and sorrows.  As for us, the goal must be considered as an end; we have to justify it on the basis of our freedom which has projected it, by the ensemble of the movement which ends in its fulfillment.  The tasks we have set up for ourselves and which, though exceeding the limits of our lives, are ours, must find their meaning in themselves and not in a mythical Historical end.  But then, if we reject the idea of a future-myth in order to retain only that of a living and finite future, one which delimits transitory forms, we have not removed the antinomy of action; the present sacrifices and failures no longer seem compensated for in any point of time.  And utility can no longer be defined absolutely.  Thus, are we not ending by condemning action as criminal and absurd though at the same time condemning man to action? 5.  AMBIGUITY The notion of ambiguity must not be confused with that of absurdity.  To declare that existence is absurd is to deny that it can ever be given a meaning; to say that it is ambiguous is to assert that its meaning is never fixed, that it must be constantly won.  Absurdity challenges every ethics; but also the finished rationalization of the real would leave no room for ethics; it is because man’s condition is ambiguous that he seeks, through failure and outrageousness, to save his existence.  Thus, to say that action has to be lived in its truth, that is, in the consciousness of the antinomies which it involves, does not mean that one has to renounce it.  In Plutarch Lied Pierrefeu rightly says that in war there is no victory which can not be regarded as unsuccessful, for the objective which one aims at is the total annihilation of the enemy and this result is never attained; yet there are wars which are won and wars which are lost.  So is it with any activity; failure and success are two aspects of reality which at the start are not perceptible.  That is what makes criticism so easy and art so difficult: the critic is always in a good position to show the limits that every artist gives himself in choosing himself; painting is not given completely either in Giotto or Titian or Cezanne; it is sought through the centuries and is never finished; a painting in which all pictorial problems are resolved is really inconceivable; painting itself is this movement toward its own reality; it is not the vain displacement of a millstone turning in the void; it concretizes itself on each canvas as an absolute existence.  Art and science do not establish themselves despite failure but through it; which does not prevent there being truths and errors, masterpieces and lemons, depending upon whether the discovery or the painting has or has not known how to win the adherence of human consciousnesses; this amounts to saying that failure, always ineluctable, is in certain cases spared and in others not.  It is interesting to pursue this comparison; not that we are likening action to a work of art or a scientific theory, but because in any case human transcendence must cope with the same problem: it has to found itself, though it is prohibited from ever fulfilling itself.  Now, we know that neither science nor art ever leaves it up to the future to justify its present existence.  In no age does art consider itself as something which is paving the way for Art: so-called archaic art prepares for classicism only in the eyes of archaeologists; the sculptor who fashioned the Korai of Athens rightfully thought that he was producing a finished work of art; in no age has science considered itself as partial and lacunary; without believing itself to be definitive, it has however, always wanted to be a total expression of the world, and it is in its totality that in each age it again raises the question of its own validity.  There we have an example of how man must, in any event, assume his finiteness: not by treating his existence as transitory or relative but by reflecting the infinite within it, that is, by treating it as absolute.  There is an art only because at every moment art has willed itself absolutely; likewise there is a liberation of man only if, in aiming at itself, freedom is achieved absolutely in the very fact of aiming at itself.  This requires that each action be considered as a finished form whose different moments, instead of fleeing toward the future in order to find there their justification, reflect and confirm one another so well that there is no longer a sharp separation between present and future, between means and ends.  But if these moments constitute a unity, there must be no contradiction among them.  Since the liberation aimed at is not a thing situated in an unfamiliar time, but a movement which realizes itself by tending to conquer, it can not attain itself if it denies itself at the start; action can not seek to fulfill itself by means which would destroy its very meaning.  So much so that in certain situations there will be no other issue for man than rejection.  In what is called political realism there is no room for rejection because the present is considered as transitory; there is rejection only if man lays claim in the present to his existence as an absolute value; then he must absolutely reject what would deny this value.  Today, more or less consciously in the name of such an ethics, we condemn a magistrate who handed over a communist to save ten hostages and along with him all the Vichyites who were trying “to make the best of things:” it was not a matter of rationalizing the present such as it was imposed by the German occupation, but of rejecting it unconditionally.  The resistance did not aspire to a positive effectiveness; it was a negation, a revolt, a martyrdom; and in this negative movement freedom was positively and absolutely confirmed.  In one sense the negative attitude is easy; the rejected object is given unequivocally and unequivocally defines the revolt that one opposes to it; thus, all French antifascists were united during the occupation by their common resistance to a single oppressor.  The return to the positive encounters many more obstacles, as we have well seen in France where divisions and hatreds were revived at the same time as were the parties.  In the moment of rejection, the antinomy of action is removed, and means and end meet; freedom immediately sets itself up as its own goal and fulfills itself by so doing.  But the antinomy reappears as soon as freedom again gives itself ends which are far off in the future; then, through the resistances of the given, divergent means offer themselves and certain ones come to be seen as contrary to their ends.  It has often been observed that revolt alone is pure.  Every construction implies the outrage of dictatorship, of violence.  This is the theme, among others, of Koestler’s Gladiators.  Those who, like this symbolic Spartacus, do not want to retreat from the outrage and resign themselves to impotence, usually seek refuge in the values of seriousness.  That is why, among individuals as well as collectivities, the negative moment is often the most genuine.  Goethe, Barres, and Aragon, disdainful or rebellious in their romantic youth, shattered old conformisms and thereby proposed a real, though incomplete, liberation.  But what happened later on? Goethe became a servant of the state, Barres of nationalism, and Aragon of Stalinist conformism.  We know how the seriousness of the Catholic Church was substituted for the Christian spirit, which was a rejection of dead Law, a subjective rapport of the individual with God through faith and charity; the Reformation was a revolt of subjectivity, but Protestantism in turn changed into an objective moralism in which the seriousness of works replaced the restlessness of faith.  As for revolutionary humanism, it accepts only rarely the tension of permanent liberation; it has created a Church where salvation is bought by membership in a party as it is bought elsewhere by baptism and indulgences.  We have seen that this recourse to the serious is a lie; it entails the sacrifice of man to the Thing, of freedom to the Cause.  In order for the return to the positive to be genuine it must involve negativity, it must not conceal the antinomies between means and end, present and future; they must be lived in a permanent tension; one must retreat from neither the outrage of violence nor deny it, or, which amounts to the same thing, assume it lightly.  Kierkegaard has said that what distinguishes the pharisee from the genuinely moral man is that the former considers his anguish as a sure sign of his virtue; from the fact that he asks himself, “Am I Abraham?” he concludes, “I am Abraham;” but morality resides in the painfulness of an indefinite questioning.  The problem which we are posing is not the same as that of Kierkegaard; the important thing to us is to know whether, in given conditions, Isaac must be killed or not.  But we also think that what distinguishes the tyrant from the man of good will is that the first rests in the certainty of his aims, whereas the second keeps asking himself, “Am I really working for the liberation of men? Isn’t this end contested by the sacrifices through which I aim at it?” In setting up its ends, freedom must put them in parentheses, confront them at each moment with that absolute end which it itself constitutes, and contest, in its own name, the means it uses to win itself.  It will be said that these considerations remain quite abstract.  What must be done, practically? Which action is good? Which is bad? To ask such a question is also to fall into a naive abstraction.  We don’t ask the physicist, “Which hypotheses are true?” Nor the artist, “By what procedures does one produce a work whose beauty is guaranteed?” Ethics does not furnish recipes any more than do science and art.  One can merely propose methods.  Thus, in science the fundamental problem is to make the idea adequate to its content and the law adequate to the facts; the logician finds that in the case where the pressure of the given fact bursts the concept which serves to comprehend it, one is obliged to invent another concept; but he can not define a priori the moment of invention, still less foresee it.  Analogously, one may say that in the case where the content of the action falsifies its meaning, one must modify not the meaning, which is here willed absolutely, but the content itself; however, it is impossible to determine this relationship between meaning and content abstractly and universally: there must be a trial and decision in each case.  But likewise just as the physicist finds it profitable to reflect on the conditions of scientific invention and the artist on those of artistic creation without expecting any ready-made solutions to come from these reflections, it is useful for the man of action to find out under what conditions his undertakings are valid.  We are going to see that on this basis new perspectives are disclosed.  In the first place, it seems to us that the individual as such is one of the ends at which our action must aim.  Here we are at one with the point of view of Christian charity, the Epicurean cult of friendship, and Kantian moralism which treats each man as an end.  He interests us not merely as a member of a class, a nation, or a collectivity, but as an individual man.  This distinguishes us from the systematic politician who cares only about collective destinies; and probably a tramp enjoying his bottle of wine, or a child playing with a balloon, or a Neapolitan lazzarone loafing in the sun in no way helps in the liberation of man; that is why the abstract will of the revolutionary scorns the concrete benevolence which occupies itself in satisfying desires which have no morrow.  However, it must not be forgotten that there is a concrete bond between freedom and existence; to will man free is to will there to be being, it is to will the disclosure of being in the joy of existence; in order for the idea of liberation to have a concrete meaning, the joy of existence must be asserted in each one, at every instant; the movement toward freedom assumes its real, flesh and blood figure in the world by thickening into pleasure, into happiness.  If the satisfaction of an old man drinking a glass of wine counts for nothing, then production and wealth are only hollow myths; they have meaning only if they are capable of being retrieved in individual and living joy.  The saving of time and the conquest of leisure have no meaning if we are not moved by the laugh of a child at play.  If we do not love life on our own account and through others, it is futile to seek to justify it in any way.  However, politics is right in rejecting benevolence to the extent that the latter thoughtlessly sacrifices the future to the present.  The ambiguity of freedom, which very often is occupied only in fleeing from itself, introduces a difficult equivocation into relationships with each individual taken one by one.  Just what is meant by the expression “to love others”? What is meant by taking them as ends? In any event, it is evident that we are not going to decide to fulfill the will of every man.  There are cases where a man positively wants evil, that is, the enslavement of other men, and he must then be fought.  It also happens that, without harming anyone, he flees from his own freedom, seeking passionately and alone to attain the being which constantly eludes him.  If he asks for our help, are we to give it to him? We blame a man who helps a drug addict intoxicate himself or a desperate man commit suicide, for we think that rash behavior of this sort is an attempt of the individual against his own freedom; he must be made aware of his error and put in the presence of the real demands of his freedom.  Well and good.  But what if he persists? Must we then use violence? There again the serious man busies himself dodging the problem; the values of life, of health, and of moral conformism being set up, one does not hesitate to impose them on others.  But we know that this pharisaism can cause the worst disasters: lacking drugs, the addict may kill himself.  It is no more necessary to serve an abstract ethics obstinately than to yield without due consideration to impulses of pity or generosity; violence is justified only if it opens concrete possibilities to the freedom which I am trying to save; by practising it I am willy-nilly assuming an engagement in relation to others and to myself; a man whom I snatch from the death which he had chosen has the right to come and ask me for means and reasons for living; the tyranny practised against an invalid can be justified only by his getting better; whatever the purity of the intention which animates me, any dictatorship is a fault for which I have to get myself pardoned.  Besides, I am in no position to make decisions of this sort indiscriminately; the example of the unknown person who throws himself in to the Seine and whom I hesitate whether or not to fish out is quite abstract; in the absence of a concrete bond with this desperate person my choice will never be anything but a contingent facticity.  If I find myself in a position to do violence to a child, or to a melancholic, sick, or distraught person the reason is that I also find myself charged with his upbringing, his happiness, and his health: I am a parent, a teacher, a nurse, a doctor, or a friend… So, by a tacit agreement, by the very fact that I am solicited, the strictness of my decision is accepted or even desired; the more seriously I accept my responsibilities, the more justified it is.  That is why love authorizes severities which are not granted to indifference.  What makes the problem so complex is that, on the one hand, one must not make himself an accomplice of that flight from freedom that is found in heedlessness, caprice, mania, and passion, and that, on the other hand, it is the abortive movement of man toward being which is his very existence, it is through the failure which he has assumed that he asserts himself as a freedom.  To want to prohibit a man from error is to forbid him to fulfill his own existence, it is to deprive him of life.  At the beginning of Claudel’s The Satin Shoe, the husband of Dona Prouheze, the Judge, the Just, as the author regards him, explains that every plant needs a gardener in order to grow and that he is the one whom heaven has destined for his young wife; beside the fact that we are shocked by the arrogance of such a thought (for how does he know that he is this enlightened gardener? Isn’t he merely a jealous husband?) this likening of a soul to a plant is not acceptable; for, as Kant would say, the value of an act lies not in its conformity to an external model, but in its internal truth.  We object to the inquisitors who want to create faith and virtue from without; we object to all forms of fascism which seek to fashion the happiness of man from without; and also the paternalism which thinks that it has done something for man by prohibiting him from certain possibilities of temptation, whereas what is necessary is to give him reasons for resisting it.  Thus, violence is not immediately justified when it opposes willful acts which one considers perverted; it becomes inadmissible if it uses the pretext of ignorance to deny a freedom which, as we have seen, can be practised within ignorance itself.  Let the “enlightened elites” strive to change the situation of the child, the illiterate, the primitive crushed beneath his superstitions; that is one of their most urgent tasks; but in this very effort they must respect a freedom which, like theirs, is absolute.  They are always opposed, for example, to the extension of universal suffrage by adducing the incompetence of the masses, of women, of the natives in the colonies; but this forgetting that man always has to decide by himself in the darkness, that he must want beyond what he knows.  If infinite knowledge were necessary (even supposing that it were conceivable), then the colonial administrator himself would not have the right to freedom; he is much further from perfect knowledge than the most backward savage is from him.  Actually, to vote is not to govern; and to govern is not merely to maneuver; there is an ambiguity today, and particularly in France, because we think that we are not the master of our destiny; we no longer hope to help make history, we are resigned to submitting to it; all that our internal politics does is reflect the play of external forces, no party hopes to determine the fate of the country but merely to foresee the future which is being prepared in the world by foreign powers and to use, as best we can, the bit of indetermination which still escapes their foresight.  Drawn along by this tactical realism, the citizens themselves no longer consider the vote as the assertion of their will but as a maneuver, whether one adheres completely to the maneuvering of a party or whether.  one invents his own strategy; the electors consider themselves not as men who are consulted about a particular point but as forces which are numbered and which are ordered about with a view to distant ends.  And that is probably why the French, who formerly were so eager to declare their opinions, take no further interest in an act which has become a disheartening strategy.  So, the fact is that if it is necessary not to vote but to measure the weight of one’s vote, this calculation requires such extensive information and such a sureness of foresight that only a specialized technician can have the boldness to express an opinion.  But that is one of the abuses whereby the whole meaning of democracy is lost; the logical conclusion of this would be to suppress the vote.  The vote should really be the expression of a concrete will, the choice of a representative capable of defending, within the general framework of the country and the world, the particular interests of his electors.  The ignorant and the outcast also has interests to defend; he alone is “competent” to decide upon his hopes and his trust.  By a sophism which leans upon the dishonesty of the serious, one does not merely argue about his formal impotence to choose, but one draws arguments from the content of his choice.  I recall, among others, the naivete of a rightthinking young girl who said, “The vote for women is all well and good in principle, only, if women get the vote, they’ll all vote red.” With like impudence it is almost unanimously stated today in France that if the natives of the French Union were given the rights of self-determination, they would live quietly in their villages without doing anything, which would be harmful to the higher interests of the Economy.  And doubtless the state of stagnation in which they choose to live is not that which a man can wish for another man; it is desirable to open new possibilities to the indolent negroes so that the interests of the Economy may one day merge with theirs.  But for the time being, they are left to vegetate in the sort of situation where their freedom can merely be negative: the best thing they can desire is not to tire themselves, not to suffer, and not to work; and even this freedom is denied them.  It is the most consummate and inacceptable form of oppression.  However, the “enlightened elite” objects, one does not let a child dispose of himself, one does not permit him to vote.  This is another sophism.  To the extent that woman or the happy or resigned slave lives in the infantile world of ready-made values, calling them “an eternal child” or “a grown-up child” has some meaning, but the analogy is only partial.  Childhood is a particular sort of situation: it is a natural situation whose limits are not created by other men and which is thereby not comparable to a situation of oppression; it is a situation which is common to all men and which is temporary for all; therefore, it does not represent a limit which cuts off the individual from his possibilities, but, on the contrary, the moment of a development in which new possibilities are won.  The child is ignorant because he has not yet had the time to acquire knowledge, not because this time has been refused him.  To treat him as a child is not to bar him from the future but to open it to him; he needs to be taken in hand, he invites authority, it is the form which the resistance of facticity, through which all liberation is brought about, takes for him.  And on the other hand, even in this situation the child has a right to his freedom and must be respected as a human person.  What gives Emile its value is the brilliance with which Rousseau asserts this principle.  There is a very annoying naturalistic optimism in Emile; in the rearing of the child, as in any relationship with others, the ambiguity of freedom implies the outrage of violence; in a sense, all education is a failure.  But Rousseau is right in refusing to allow childhood to be oppressed.  And in practice raising a child as one cultivates a plant which one does not consult about its needs is very different from considering it as a freedom to whom the future must be opened.  Thus, we can set up point number one: the good of an individual or a group of individuals requires that it be taken as an absolute end of our action; but we are not authorized to decide upon this end a priori.  The fact is that no behavior is ever authorized to begin with, and one of the concrete consequences of existentialist ethics is the rejection of all the previous justifications which might be drawn from the civilization, the age, and the culture; it is the rejection of every principle of authority.  To put it positively, the precept will be to treat the other (to the extent that he is the only one concerned, which is the moment that we are considering at present) as a freedom so that his end may be freedom; in using this conductingwire one will have to incur the risk, in each case, of inventing an original solution.  Out of disappointment in love a young girl takes an overdose of pheno-barbital; in the morning friends find her dying, they call a doctor, she is saved; later on she becomes a happy mother of a family; her friends were right in considering her suicide as a hasty and heedless act and in putting her into a position to reject it or return to it freely.  But in asylums one sees melancholic patients who have tried to commit suicide twenty times, who devote their freedom to seeking the means of escaping their jailers and of putting an end to their intolerable anguish; the doctor who gives them a friendly pat on the shoulder is their tyrant and their torturer.  A friend who is intoxicated by alcohol or drugs asks me for money so that he can go and buy the poison that is necessary to him; I urge him to get cured, I take him to a doctor, I try to help him live; insofar as there is a chance of my being successful, I am acting correctly in refusing him the sum he asks for.  But if circumstances prohibit me from doing anything to change the situation in which he is struggling, all I can do is give in; a deprivation of a few hours will do nothing but exasperate his torments uselessly; and he may have recourse to extreme means to get what I do not give him.  That is also the problem touched on by Ibsen in The Wild Duck.  An individual lives in a situation of falsehood; the falsehood is violence, tyranny: shall I tell the truth in order to free the victim? It would first be necessary to create a situation of such a kind that the truth might be bearable and that, though losing his illusions, the deluded individual might again find about him reasons for hoping.  What makes the problem more complex is that the freedom of one man almost always concerns that of other individuals.  Here is a married couple who persist in living in a hovel; if one does not succeed in giving them the desire to live in a more healthful dwelling, they must be allowed to follow their preferences; but the situation changes if they have children; the freedom of the parents would be the ruin of their sons, and as freedom and the future are on the side of the latter, these are the ones who must first be taken into account.  The Other is multiple, and on the basis of this new questions arise.  One might first wonder for whom we are seeking freedom and happiness.  When raised in this way, the problem is abstract; the answer will, therefore, be arbitrary, and the arbitrary always involves outrage.  It is not entirely the fault of the district social-worker if she is apt to be odious; because, her money and time being limited, she hesitates before distributing it to this one or that one, she appears to others as a pure externality, a blind facticity.  Contrary to the formal strictness of Kantianism for whom the more abstract the act is the more virtuous it is, generosity seems to us to be better grounded and therefore more valid the less distinction there is between the other and ourself and the more we fulfill ourself in taking the other as an end.  That is what happens if I am engaged in relation to others.  The Stoics impugned the ties of family, friendship, and nationality so that they recognized only the universal form of man.  But man is man only through situations whose particularity is precisely a universal fact.  There are men who expect help from certain men and not from others, and these expectations define privileged lines of action.  It is fitting that the negro fight for the negro, the Jew for the Jew, the proletarian for the proletarian, and the Spaniard in Spain.  But the assertion of these particular solidarities must not contradict the will for universal solidarity and each finite undertaking must also be open on the totality of men.  But it is then that we find in concrete form the conflicts which we have described abstractly; for the cause of freedom can triumph only through particular sacrifices.  And certainly there are hierarchies among the goods desired by men: one will not hesitate to sacrifice the comfort, luxury, and leisure of certain men to assure the liberation of certain others; but when it is a question of choosing among freedoms, how shall we decide? Let us repeat, one can only indicate a method here.  The first point is always to consider what genuine human interest fills the abstract form which one proposes as the action’s end.  Politics always puts forward Ideas: Nation, Empire, Union, Economy, etc.  But none of these forms has value in itself; it has it only insofar as it involves concrete individuals.  If a nation can assert itself proudly only to the detriment of its members, if a union can be created only to the detriment of those it is trying to unite, the nation or the union must be rejected.  We repudiate all idealisms, mysticisms, etcetera which prefer a Form to man himself.  But the matter becomes really agonizing when it is a question of a Cause which genuinely serves man.  That is why the question of Stalinist politics, the problem of the relationship of the Party to the masses which it uses in order to serve them, is in the forefront of the preoccupations of all men of good will.  However, there are very few who raise it without dishonesty, and we must first try to dispel a few fallacies.  The opponent of the U.S.S.R.  is making use of a fallacy when, emphasizing the part of criminal violence assumed by Stalinist politics, he neglects to confront it with the ends pursued.  Doubtless, the purges, the deportations, the abuses of the occupation, and the police dictatorship surpass in importance the violences practised by any other country; the very fact that there are a hundred and sixty million inhabitants in Russia multiplies the numerical coefficient of the injustices committed.  But these quantitative considerations are insufficient.  One can no more judge the means without the end which gives it its meaning than he can detach the end from the means which defines it.  Lynching a negro or suppressing a hundred members of the opposition are two analogous acts.  Lynching is an absolute evil; it represents the survival of an obsolete civilization, the perpetuation of a struggle of races which has to disappear; it is a fault without justification or excuse.  Suppressing a hundred opponents is surely an outrage, but it may have meaning and a reason; it is a matter of maintaining a regime which brings to an immense mass of men a bettering of their lot.  Perhaps this measure could have been avoided; perhaps it merely represents that necessary element of failure which is involved in any positive construction.  It can be judged only by being replaced in the ensemble of the cause it serves.  But, on the other hand, the defender of the U.S.S.R.  is making use of a fallacy when he unconditionally justifies the sacrifices and the crimes by the ends pursued; it would first be necessary to prove that, on the one hand, the end is unconditioned and that, on the other hand, the crimes committed in its name were strictly necessary.  Against the death of Bukharin one counters with Stalingrad; but one would have to know to what effective extent the Moscow trials increased the chances of the Russian victory.  One of the ruses of Stalinist orthodoxy is, playing on the idea of necessity, to put the whole of the revolution on one side of the scale; the other side will always seem very light.  But the very idea of a total dialectic of history does not imply that any factor is ever determining; on the contrary, if one admits that the life of a man may change the course of events, it is that one adheres to the conception which grants a preponderant role to Cleopatra’s nose and Cromwell’s wart.  One is here playing, with utter dishonesty, on two opposite conceptions of the idea of necessity: one synthetic, and the other analytic; one dialectic, the other deterministic.  The first makes History appear as an intelligible becoming within which the particularity of contingent accidents is reabsorbed; the dialectical sequence of the moments is possible only if there is within each moment an indetermination of the particular elements taken one by one.  If, on the contrary, one grants the strict determinism of each causal series, one ends in a contingent and disordered vision of the ensemble, the conjunction of the series being brought about by chance.  Therefore, a Marxist must recognize that none of his particular decisions involves the revolution in its totality; it is merely a matter of hastening or retarding its coming, of saving himself the use of other and more costly means.  That does not mean that he must retreat from violence but that he must not regard it as justified a priori by its ends.  If he considers his enterprise in its truth, that is, in its finiteness, he will understand that he has never anything but a finite stake to oppose to the sacrifices which he calls for, and that it is an uncertain stake.  Of course, this uncertainty should not keep him from pursuing his goals; but it requires that one concern himself in each case with finding a balance between the goal and its means.  Thus, we challenge every condemnation as well as every a prion justification of the violence practised with a view to a valid end.  They must be legitimized concretely.  A calm, mathematical calculation is here impossible.  One must attempt to judge the chances of success that are involved in a certain sacrifice; but at the beginning this judgment will always be doubtful; besides, in the face of the immediate reality of the sacrifice, the notion of chance is difficult to think about.  On the one hand, one can multiply a probability infinitely without ever reaching certainty; but yet, practically, it ends by merging with this asymptote: in our private life as in our collective life there is no other truth than a statistical one.  On the other hand, the interests at stake do not allow themselves to be put into an equation; the suffering of one man, that of a million men, are incommensurable with the conquests realized by millions of others, present death is incommensurable with the life to come.  It would be Utopian to want to set up on the one hand the chances of success multiplied by the stake one is after, and on the other hand the weight of the immediate sacrifice.  One finds himself back at the anguish of free decision.  And that is why political choice is an ethical choice: it is a wager as well as a decision; one bets on the chances and risks of the measure under consideration; but whether chances and risks must be assumed or not in the given circumstances must be decided without help, and in so doing one sets up values.  If in 1793 the Girondists rejected the violences of the Terror whereas a Saint-Just and a Robespierre assumed them, the reason is that they did not have the same conception of freedom.  Nor was the same republic being aimed at between 1830 and 1840 by the republicans who limited themselves to a purely political opposition and those who adopted the technique of insurrection.  In each case it is a matter of defining an end and realizing it, knowing that the choice of the means employed affects both the definition and the fulfillment.  Ordinarily, situations are so complex that a long analysis is necessary before being able to pose the ethical moment of the choice.  We shall confine ourselves here to the consideration of a few simple examples which will enable us to make our attitude somewhat more precise.  In an underground revolutionary movement when one discovers the presence of a stool-pigeon, one does not hesitate to beat him up; he is a present and future danger who has to be gotten rid of; but if a man is merely suspected of treason, the case is more ambiguous.  We blame those northern peasants who in the war of 1914-18 massacred an innocent family which was suspected of signaling to the enemy; the reason is that not only were the presumptions vague, but the danger was uncertain; at any rate, it was enough to put the suspects into prison; while waiting for a serious inquiry it was easy to keep them from doing any harm.  However, if a questionable individual holds the fate of other men in his hands, if, in order to avoid the risk of killing one innocent man, one runs the risk of letting ten innocent men die, it is reasonable to sacrifice him.  We can merely ask that such decisions be not taken hastily and lightly, and that, all things considered, the evil that one inflicts be lesser than that which is being forestalled.  There are cases still more disturbing because there the violence is not immediately efficacious; the violences of the Resistance did not aim at the material weakening of Germany; it happens that their purpose was to create such a state of violence that collaboration would be impossible; in one sense, the burning of a whole French village was too high a price to pay for the elimination of three enemy officers; but those fires and the massacring of hostages were themselves parts of the plan; they created an abyss between the occupiers and the occupied.  Likewise, the insurrections in Paris and Lyons at the beginning of the nineteenth century, or the revolts in India, did not aim at shattering the yoke of the oppressor at one blow, but rather at creating and keeping alive the meaning of the revolt and at making the mystifications of conciliation impossible.  Attempts which are aware that one by one they are doomed to failure can be legitimized by the whole of the situation which they create.  This is also the meaning of Steinbeck’s novel In Dubious Battle where a communist leader does not hesitate to launch a costly strike of uncertain success but through which there will be born, along with the solidarity of the workers, the consciousness of exploitation and the will to reject it.  It seems to me interesting to contrast this example with the debate in John Dos Passos’ The Adventures of a Young Man.  Following a strike, some American miners are condemned to death.  Their comrades try to have their trial reconsidered.  Two methods are put forward: one can act officially, and one knows that they then have an excellent chance of winning their case; one can also work up a sensational trial with the Communist Party taking the affair in hand, stirring up a press campaign and circulating international petitions; but the court will be unwilling to yield to this intimidation.  The party will thereby get a tremendous amount of publicity, but the miners will be condemned.  What is a man of good will to decide in this case? Dos Passos’ hero chooses to save the miners and we believe that he did right.  Certainly, if it were necessary to choose between the whole revolution and the lives of two or three men, no revolutionary would hesitate; but it was merely a matter of helping along the party propaganda, or better, of increasing somewhat its chances of developing within the United States; the immediate interest of the C.P.  in that country is only hypothetically tied up with that of the revolution; in fact, a cataclysm like the war has so upset the situation of the world that a great part of the gains and losses of the past have been absolutely swept away.  If it is really men which the movement claims to be serving, in this case it must prefer saving the lives of three concrete individuals to a very uncertain and weak chance of serving a little more effectively by their sacrifice the mankind to come.  If it considers these lives negligible, it is because it too ranges itself on the side of the formal politicians who prefer the Idea to its content; it is because it prefers itself, in its subjectivity, to the goals to which it claims to be dedicated.  Besides, whereas in the example chosen by Steinbeck the strike is immediately an appeal to the freedom of the workers and in its very failure is already a liberation, the sacrifice of the miners is a mystification and an oppression; they are duped by being made to believe that an effort is being made to save their lives, and the whole proletariat is duped with them.  Thus, in both examples, we find ourselves before the same abstract case: men are going to die so that the party which claims to be serving them will realize a limited gain; but a concrete analysis leads us to opposite moral solutions.  It is apparent that the method we are proposing, analogous in this respect to scientific or aesthetic methods, consists, in each case, of confronting the values realized with the values aimed at, and the meaning of the act with its content.  The fact is that the politician, contrary to the scientist and the artist, and although the element of failure which he assumes is much more outrageous, is rarely concerned with making use of it.  May it be that there is an irresistible dialectic of power wherein morality has no place? Is the ethical concern, even in its realistic and concrete form, detrimental to the interests of action? The objection will surely be made that hesitation and misgivings only impede victory.  Since, in any case, there is an element of failure in all success, since the ambiguity, at any rate, must be surmounted, why not refuse to take notice of it? In the first number of the Cahiers d’Action a reader declared that once and for all we should regard the militant communist as “the permanent hero of our time” and should reject the exhausting tension demanded by existentialism; installed in the permanence of heroism, one will blindly direct himself toward an uncontested goal; but one then resembles Colonel de la Roque who unwaveringly went right straight ahead of him without knowing where he was going.  Malaparte relates that the young Nazis, in order to become insensitive to the suffering of others, practised by plucking out the eyes of live cats; there is no more radical way of avoiding the pitfalls of ambiguity.  But an action which wants to serve man ought to be careful not to forget him on the way; if it chooses to fulfill itself blindly, it will lose its meaning or will take on an unforeseen meaning; for the goal is not fixed once and for all; it is defined all along the road which leads to it.  Vigilance alone can keep alive the validity of the goals and the genuine assertion of freedom.  Moreover, ambiguity can not fail to appear on the scene; it is felt by the victim, and his revolt or his complaints also make it exist for his tyrant; the latter will then be tempted to put everything into question, to renounce, thus denying both himself and his ends; or, if he persists, he will continue to blind himself only by multiplying crimes and by perverting his original design more and more.  The fact is that the man of action becomes a dictator not in respect to his ends but because these ends are necessarily set up through his will.  Hegel, in his Phenomenology, has emphasized this inextricable confusion between objectivity and subjectivity.  A man gives himself to a Cause only by making it his Cause; as he fulfills himself within it, it is also through him that it is expressed, and the will to power is not distinguished in such a case from generosity; when an individual or a party chooses to triumph, whatever the cost may be, it is their own triumph which they take for an end.  If the fusion of the Commissar and the Yogi were realized, there would be a self-criticism in the man of action which would expose to him the ambiguity of his will, thus arresting the imperious drive of his subjectivity and, by the same token, contesting the unconditioned value of the goal.  But the fact is that the politician follows the line of least resistance; it is easy to fall asleep over the unhappiness of others and to count it for very little; it is easier to throw a hundred men, ninety-seven of whom are innocent, into prison, than to discover the three culprits who are hidden among them; it is easier to kill a man than to keep a close watch on him; all politics makes use of the police, which officially flaunts its radical contempt for the individual and which loves violence for its own sake.  The thing that goes by the name of political necessity is in part the laziness and brutality of the police.  That is why it is incumbent upon ethics not to follow the line of least resistance; an act which is not destined, but rather quite freely consented to; it must make itself effective so that what was at first facility may become difficult.  For want of internal criticism, this is the role that an opposition must take upon itself.  There are two types of opposition.  The first is a rejection of the very ends set up by a regime: it is the opposition of anti-fascism to fascism, of fascism to socialism.  In the second type, the oppositionist accepts the objective goal but criticizes the subjective movement which aims at it; he may not even wish for a change of power, but he deems it necessary to bring into play a contestation which will make the subjective appear as such.  Thereby he exacts a perpetual contestation of the means by the end and of the end by the means.  He must be careful himself not to ruin, by the means which he employs, the end he is aiming at, and above all not to pass into the service of the oppositionists of the first type.  But, delicate as it may be, his role is, neverthless, necessary.  Indeed, on the one hand, it would be absurd to oppose a liberating action with the pretext that it implies crime and tyranny; for without crime and tyranny there could be no liberation of man; one can not escape that dialectic which goes from freedom to freedom through dictatorship and oppression.  But, on the other hand, he would be guilty of allowing the liberating movement to harden into a moment which is acceptable only if it passes into its opposite; tyranny and crime must be kept from triumphantly establishing themselves in the world; the conquest of freedom is their only justification, and the assertion of freedom against them must therefore be kept alive.