.  Fear and Trembling Preamble from the Heart An old proverb pertaining to the outward and visible world says: ‘Only one who works gets bread.’ Oddly enough, the saying doesn’t apply in the world to which it most properly belongs, for the outward world is subject to the law of imperfection; there it happens time and again that one who gets bread is one who does not work, that one who sleeps gets it in greater abundance than one who labours.  In the outward world everything belongs to whoever has it, the outward world is subject to the law of indifference and the genie of the ring obeys the one who wears it, whether he be a Noureddin or an Aladdin, and whoever holds the world’s treasures does so however he came by them.  It is otherwise in the world of spirit.  Here there prevails an eternal divine order, here it does not rain on the just and the unjust alike, here the sun does not shine on both good and evil, here only one who works gets bread, and only one who knows anguish finds rest, only one who descends to the underworld saves the loved one, only one who draws the knife gets Isaac.  He who will not work does not get bread, but will be deluded, as the gods deluded Orpheus with an airy figure in place of the beloved, deluded him because he was tender-hearted, not courageous, deluded him because he was a lyre-player, not a man.  Here it is no help to have Abraham as one’s father, or seventeen centuries of noble ancestry; of anyone who will not work here one can say what is written about Israel’s virgins, he gives birth to wind - while the one who works will give birth to his own father.  Conventional wisdom aims presumptuously to introduce into the world of spirit that same law of indifference under which the outside world groans.  It believes it is enough to have knowledge of large truths.  No other work is necessary.  But then it does not get bread, it starves to death while everything is transformed into gold.  And what else does it know? There were many thousands in the Greece of the time, countless others in later generations, who knew all the victories of Miltiades, but there was only one who lost sleep over them.  There were countless generations that knew the story of Abraham by heart, word for word.  How many did it make sleepless? Now the story of Abraham has the remarkable quality that it will always be glorious no matter how impoverished our understanding of it, but only - for it is true here too - if we are willing to ‘labour and be heavy laden’.  But labour they will not, and yet they still want to understand the story.  One speaks in Abraham’s honour, but how? By making it a commonplace: ‘his greatness was that he so loved God that he was willing to offer him the best he had.’ That is very true, but ‘best’ is a vague expression.  In word and thought one can quite safely identify Isaac with the best, and the man who so thinks can very well puff at his pipe as he does so, and the listener can very well leisurely stretch out his legs.  If the rich young man whom Christ met on the road had sold all his possessions and given them to the poor, we would praise him as we praise all great deeds, but we would not understand even him without some labour.  Yet he would not have become an Abraham even had he given away the best he had.  What is left out of the Abraham story is the anguish; for while I am under no obligation to money, to a son the father has the highest and most sacred of obligations.  Yet anguish is a dangerous affair for the squeamish, so people forget it, notwithstanding they want to talk about Abraham.  So they talk and in the course of conversation they interchange the words ‘Isaac’ and ‘best’.  Everything goes excellently.  Should someone in the audience be suffering from insomnia, however, there is likely to be the most appalling, most profound, tragi-comic misunderstanding.  He goes home, he wants to do just like Abraham; for the son is certainly the best thing he has.  Should that speaker hear word of this, he might go to the man, summon all his clerical authority, and shout: ‘Loathsome man, dregs of society, what devil has so possessed you that you wanted to murder your own son?’ And this priest, who had felt no signs of heat or perspiration while preaching about Abraham, would be surprised at the righteous wrath with which he fulminates against that poor man; he would be pleased with himself, for never had he spoken with such pungency and fervour before.  He would say to himself, and his wife: ‘I’m an orator, all I’ve needed was the opportunity; when I spoke about Abraham on Sunday I didn’t feel at all carried away.’ If the same speaker still had some slight excess of wit to spare he would surely lose it were the sinner to reply coolly and with dignity: ‘It was in fact what you yourself preached on Sunday.’ How could a priest get such an idea into his head? And yet he did so, and the mistake was only that he hadn’t known what he was saying.  Why doesn’t some poet take up situations like these instead of the stuff and nonsense that fills comedies and novels? The comic and the tragic converge on each other here in absolute infinity.  The priest’s speech was no doubt laughable enough in itself, but became infinitely more so in its consequence, and yet that was quite natural.  Or suppose the sinner had acceded without protest to the priest’s reprimand; or that zealous cleric had gone happily home, happy in the knowledge that his effectiveness was not confined to the pulpit but was above all evident in the irresistible power of his ministry to souls, inspiring the congregation on Sunday while on Monday, like a cherub with flaming sword, confronting him who by his deed would put that old proverb to shame which says that the world never practises what the priest preaches.  1 Should the sinner, on the other hand, not be convinced, his situation would be tragic enough.  He would no doubt be executed or sent to the madhouse; in short he would have come into an unhappy relation to so-called reality, though in another sense I should think that Abraham made him happy: for he who labours does not perish.  What explains a contradiction like this speaker’s? Is it because Abraham has acquired proprietary rights to the title of great man, so that whatever he does is great, and if anyone else does the same it is a sin, a crying sin? If so, I have no wish to take part in such mindless praise.  If faith cannot make it into a holy deed to murder one’s own son, then let the judgement fall on Abraham as on anyone else.  If one hasn’t the courage to think this thought through, to say that Abraham was a murderer, then surely it is better to acquire that courage than to waste time on undeserved speeches in his praise.  The ethical expression for what Abraham did is that he was willing to murder Isaac; the religious expression is that he was willing to sacrifice Isaac; but in this contradiction lies the very anguish that can indeed make one sleepless; and yet without that anguish Abraham is not the one he is.  Or perhaps Abraham simply didn’t do what the story says, perhaps in the context of his times what he did was something quite different.  Then let’s forget him, for why bother remembering a past that cannot be made into a present? Or perhaps something to do with the ethical aspect slipped that speaker’s mind, the fact that Isaac was the son.  For if you simply remove faith as a nix and nought there remains only the raw fact that Abraham was willing to murder Isaac, which is easy enough for anyone without faith to imitate; without the faith, that is, which makes it hard.  For my own part I don’t lack the courage to think a thought whole.  No thought has frightened me so far.  Should I ever come across one I hope I will at least have the honesty to say: ‘This thought scares me, it stirs up something else in me so that I don’t want to think it.’ If that is wrong of me I’ll no doubt get my punishment.  If I had conceded the truth of the judgement that Abraham was a murderer, I am not sure that I would have been able to silence my reverence of him.  But if that is what I myself thought, then I would presumably keep quiet, for thoughts like that are not to be intimated to others.  However, Abraham is no illusion; he hasn’t slept himself to fame; he does not owe his celebrity to any whim of fate.  Can one speak unreservedly of Abraham, then, without risking that someone will go off the rails and do likewise? Unless I dare to speak quite openly I will simply keep quiet about Abraham, and above all not diminish him so that by that very fact he becomes a snare for the weak.  If one makes faith the main thing - that is, makes it what it is - then I imagine one might dare speak of it without that risk in this day of ours which can hardly be said to outdo itself in faith, and it is only in respect of faith that one achieves resemblance to Abraham, not murder.  If one makes love into a fleeting mood, into a pleasurable agitation in a person, then one lays traps for the weak when talking of the achievements of love.  Of course everyone has momentary feelings, but if those were to be used as reasons for doing the terrible things that love has hallowed as immortal deeds everything would be lost, both the achievement and those misled in this way.  It should be all right, then, to speak about Abraham.  The great can never do harm when grasped in their greatness.  It is like a two-edged sword, bringing death and salvation.  If it should fall to my lot to speak of him, I would begin by showing what a devout and God-fearing man Abraham was, deserving to be called God’s chosen.  Only such a person is subjected to such a trial; but who is such a person? Next I would describe how Abraham loved Isaac.  To that end I would beg the support of all good spirits in making my speech as fervent as is the love of a father for his son.  I would hope to describe it in such a way that not many a father in the realm would dare maintain that he loved his son thus.  Yet if he did not love as Abraham, all thought of offering Isaac would be a temptation.  Here we already have plenty to speak of for several Sundays, so there is no need to rush.  The result, if the speech does justice to the theme, will be that some fathers will simply not want to hear more, but be happy for the time being if they have really succeeded in loving as Abraham did.  Should one of them after having caught the greatness of Abraham’s deed, but also the appallingness of it, venture out on the road, I would saddle my horse and ride along with him.  At every stop before we came to the mountain in Moriah I would explain to him that he could still turn back, could rue the misunderstanding that he was called to be tried in a conflict of this nature, could confess that he lacked the courage, so that if God wanted Isaac God must take him himself.  It is my conviction that such a person will not be disavowed, but can be blessed along with all others, though not in time.  Even in times of faith would such a person not be judged in this way? I knew someone who once could have saved my life had he possessed magnanimity.  He said plainly: ‘I see well enough what I could do, but I don’t dare.  I’m afraid that later I shall lack strength, that I shall regret it.’ He was not magnanimous, but would anyone cease to love him on that account? Having spoken thus, and moved my audience so that they appreciated at least something of the dialectical struggle of faith and its gigantic passion, I would not be guilty of the error they might impute to me by thinking: ‘Well, he has faith in such a high degree it’s enough for us just to hold on to his coat-tails.’ For I would add: ‘By no means have I faith.  I am a shrewd fellow by nature, such as always have great difficulty making the movement of faith, though I wouldn’t attach any importance in itself to a difficulty which, by overcoming it, brings a shrewd fellow no further than the most ordinary and simple-minded person has already reached without the difficulty .’ Love, after all, has its priests in the poets, and occasionally one hears a voice that knows how to keep it in shape; but about faith one hears not a word, who speaks in this passion’s praises? Philosophy goes further.  Theology sits all painted at the window courting philosophy’s favour, offering philosophy its delights.  It is said to be hard to understand Hegel, while understanding Abraham, why, that’s a bagatelle.  To go beyond Hegel, that is a miracle, but to go beyond Abraham is the simplest of all.  I for my part have devoted considerable time to understanding the Hegelian philosophy, believe also that I have more or less understood it, am rash enough to believe that at those points where, despite the trouble taken, I cannot understand it, the reason is that Hegel himself hasn’t been altogether clear.  All this I do easily, naturally, without it causing me any mental strain.  But when I have to think about Abraham I am virtually annihilated.  I am all the time aware of that monstrous paradox that is the content of Abraham’s life.  I am constantly repulsed, and my thought, for all its passion, is unable to enter into it, cannot come one hairbreadth further.  I strain every muscle to catch sight of it, but the same instant I become paralysed.  I am not unacquainted with what has been admired as great and magnanimous in the world; my soul feels an affinity with it, and is in all humility convinced that it was in my cause too that the hero strove; as I contemplate his striving I exclaim to myself: ‘ Jam tua res agitur ’ Now it’s your affair that’s at stake.  The hero I can think myself into, but not Abraham; when I reach that height I fall down since what I’m offered is a paradox.  Yet I by no means think that faith is therefore something inferior, on the contrary that it is the highest, at the same time believing it dishonest of philosophy to offer something else instead and to slight faith.  Philosophy cannot and should not give us an account of faith, but should understand itself and know just what it has indeed to offer, without taking anything away, least of all cheating people out of something by making them think it is nothing.  I am not unacquainted with life’s needs and dangers, I do not fear them, and I go to meet them undaunted.  I am not unfamiliar with horror, my memory is a faithful wife and my imagination, unlike myself, a diligent maid who sits quietly all day at her work and in the evening can speak so prettily for me that I just have to look at it even if it isn’t always landscapes or flowers or pastoral idylls she paints.  I have seen horror face to face, I do not flee it in fear but know very well that, however bravely I face it, my courage is not that of faith and not at all to be compared with it.  I cannot close my eyes and hurl myself trustingly into the absurd, for me it is impossible, but I do not praise myself on that account.  I am convinced that God is love; this thought has for me a pristine lyrical validity.  When it is present to me I am unspeakably happy, when it is absent I yearn for it more intensely than the lover for the beloved; but I do not have faith; this courage I lack.  God’s love is for me, both in a direct and inverse sense, incommensurable with the whole of reality.  I am not coward enough to whimper and moan on that account, but neither am I underhand enough to deny that faith is something far higher.  I can very well carry on living in my manner, I am happy and satisfied, but my happiness is not that of faith and compared with that is indeed unhappy.  I do not burden God with my petty cares, details don’t concern me, I gaze only upon my love and keep its virginal flame pure and clear; faith is convinced that God troubles himself about the smallest thing.  In this life I am content to be wedded to the left hand, faith is humble enough to demand the right; and that it is indeed humility I don’t, and shall never, deny.  But I wonder whether all my contemporaries really are capable of making the movement of faith? Unless I am much mistaken they are more inclined to pride themselves for doing what they don’t even think me capable of, i.e.  the imperfect.  It is against my nature to do what people so often do, talk inhumanly about the great as though some thousands of years were a huge distance; I prefer to talk about it humanly as though it happened yesterday and let only the greatness itself be the distance that either exalts or condemns.  If - in the guise of tragic hero, for higher than that I cannot come - I were summoned to such an extraordinary royal progress as that to the mountain in Moriah I know very well what I would have done.  I would not have been coward enough to stay at home, nor would I have rested on the way or dawdled, or forgotten the knife to create some delay; I am fairly certain I would have been there on the dot, with everything arranged - I might even have come too early instead, so as to have done with it quickly.  But I also know what else I would have done.  The moment I mounted the horse I would have said to myself: ‘Now everything is lost, God demands Isaac, I sacrifice him, and with him all my joy - yet God is love and for me continues to be so.’ For in the temporal world God and I cannot talk together, we have no common language.  Perhaps someone or other in our time would be foolish enough, envious enough of the great, to want to suppose, and have me suppose, that had I actually done this I would have done something even greater than Abraham, for wouldn’t my immense resignation be far more idealistic and poetic than Abraham’s narrow-mindedness? And yet this is the greatest falsehood, for my immense resignation would be a substitute for faith.  Nor could I have made more than the infinite movement in order to find myself again and rest once more in myself.  Neither would I have loved Isaac as Abraham did.  The fact that I made the movement resolutely might demonstrate my courage humanly speaking, that I loved him with all my soul is a precondition without which the whole affair becomes an act of wickedness, and yet I would not have loved as Abraham loved; for then I would have held back at the very last minute, though without this meaning that I’d arrive late at the mountain in Moriah.  Further more my behaviour would have vitiated the whole story, for I would have been at a loss had I got Isaac back again.  What Abraham found the easiest of all would for me be hard, to find joy again in Isaac! For he who with all the infinity of his soul, proprio motu et propriis auspiciis on his own accord and on his own responsibility, has made the infinite movement and can do no more, that person only keeps Isaac with pain.  But what did Abraham do? He came neither too early nor too late.  He mounted the ass, he rode slowly down the path.  All along he had faith, he believed that God would not demand Isaac of him, while still he was willing to offer him if that was indeed what was demanded.  He believed on the strength of the absurd, for there could be no question of human calculation, and it was indeed absurd that God who demanded this of him should in the next instant withdraw the demand.  He climbed the mountain, even in that moment when the knife gleamed he believed - that God would not demand Isaac.  Certainly he was surprised by the outcome, but by means of a double movement he had come back to his original position and therefore received Isaac more joyfully than the first time.  Let us go further.  We let Isaac actually be sacrificed.  Abraham had faith.  His faith was not that he should be happy sometime in the hereafter, but that he should find blessed happiness here in this world.  God could give him a new Isaac, bring the sacrificial offer back to life.  He believed on the strength of the absurd, for all human calculation had long since been suspended.  That sorrow can make one demented may be granted and is hard enough; that there is a strength of will that hauls close enough to the wind to save the understanding, even if the strain turns one slightly odd, that too may be granted.  I don’t mean to decry that.  But to be able to lose one’s understanding and with it the whole of the finite world whose stockbroker it is, and then on the strength of the absurd get exactly the same finitude back again, that leaves me aghast.  But I don’t say on that account that it is of little worth; on the contrary it is the one and only marvel.  It is commonly supposed that what faith produces is no work of art but a crude and vulgar effort only for clumsier natures; yet the truth is quite otherwise.  The dialectic of faith is the most refined and most remarkable of all dialectics, it has an elevation that I can form a conception of but no more.  I can make the great trampoline leap in which I pass over into infinitude, my back is like the tight-rope walker‘s, twisted in my childhood, and so it is easy for me.  One, two, three, I can go upside down in existence, but the next is beyond me, for the marvel I cannot perform but only be amazed at.  Yes, if only Abraham, the instant he swung his leg over the ass’s back, had said to himself: ‘Now Isaac is lost, I could just as well sacrifice him here at home as journey the long road to Moriah’ - then I wouldn’t need Abraham, whereas now I bow to his name seven times and to his deed seventy.  For that is not what he did, as I can prove by the fact that he received Isaac back with joy, really heartfelt joy, that he needed no preparation, no time to adjust himself to finitude and its joy.  Had it not been thus with Abraham he may well have loved God, but he would not have had faith; for he who loves God without faith reflects on himself, while the person who loves God reflects on God.  At this extremity stands Abraham.  The last stage he loses sight of is infinite resignation.  He really does go further and comes to faith, for all these caricatures of faith, the pitiable, lukewarm apathy that thinks ‘There’s surely no need, it’s not worth worrying before the time’, the miserable hope that says ‘Who knows what may happen, it’s possible certainly’ - these distortions belong to life’s wretchedness, and these infinite resignation has already infinitely scorned.  Abraham I cannot understand; in a way all I can learn from him is to be amazed.  If one imagines one can be moved to faith by considering the outcome of this story, one deceives oneself, and is out to cheat God of faith’s first movement, one is out to suck the life-wisdom out of the paradox.  One or another may succeed, for our age does not stop with faith, with its miracle of turning water into wine; it goes further, it turns wine into water.  Would it not be best all the same to stop with faith, and is it not disturbing that everyone wants to go further? When people nowadays-as is in fact variously announced - will not stop with love, where is it they are going? To worldly wisdom, petty calculation, to paltriness and misery, to all that can put man’s divine origin in doubt? Would it not be better to remain standing at faith, and for the one who stands there to take care not to fall? For the movement of faith must be made continually on the strength of the absurd, though in such a way, be it noted, that one does not lose finitude but gains it all of a piece.  I for my part can indeed describe the movements of faith, but I cannot perform them.  When learning how to make swimming movements, one can hang in a belt from the ceiling; one may be said to describe the movements all right but one isn’t swimming; likewise I can describe the movements of faith but when I am thrown into the water, although I may be said to be swimming (for I’m not among the waders), I make other movements, I make the movements of infinity, while faith does the opposite, having performed the movements of infinity it makes those of finitude.  Lucky the one who can make those movements, he performs a marvel, and I shall never tire of admiring him.  Whether it is Abraham or the servant in Abraham’s house, whether a professor of philosophy or a poor serving-maid is for me absolutely immaterial, I look only at the movements.  But those I do indeed look at and let myself be fooled neither by myself nor by anyone else.  The knights of infinite resignation are readily recognizable, their gait is gliding, bold.  But those who wear the jewel of faith can easily disappoint, for their exterior bears a remarkable similarity to what infinite resignation itself as much as faith scorns, namely the bourgeois philistine.  In my own experience I frankly admit to having found no reliable examples, though I would not deny on that ground that possibly every other person is one.  Still, I have tried now in vain for several years to track one down.  People commonly travel the world over to see rivers and mountains, new stars, garish birds, freak fish, grotesque breeds of human; they fall into an animal stupor that gapes at existence and they think they have seen something.  I am not concerned with this.  But if I knew where such a knight of faith lived I would journey to him on foot, for this marvel concerns me absolutely.  I would not let him slip one instant, but watch every minute how he makes the movements; I would consider myself maintained for life and divide my time between looking at him and practising the movements myself, thus devoting all my time to admiring him.  As I said, I haven’t found such a one; still, I can very well imagine him.  Here he is.  The acquaintance is struck, I am introduced.  The moment I first set eyes on him I thrust him away, jump back, clasp my hands together and say half aloud: ‘Good God! Is this the person, is it really him? He looks just like a tax-gatherer.’ Yet it is indeed him.  I come a little closer, watch the least movement in case some small, incongruous optical telegraphic message from the infinite should appear, a glance, expression, gesture, a sadness, a smile betraying the infinite by its incongruity with the finite.  No! I examine him from top to toe, in case there should be some crack through which the infinite peeped out.  No! He is solid through and through.  His stance? Vigorous, it belongs altogether to finitude, no smartly turned-out townsman taking a stroll out to Fresberg on a Sunday afternoon treads the ground with surer foot; he belongs altogether to the world, no petit bourgeois belongs to it more.  One detects nothing of the strangeness and superiority that mark the knight of the infinite.  This man takes pleasure, takes part, in everything, and whenever one catches him occupied with something his engagement has the persistence of the worldly person whose soul is wrapped up in such things.  He minds his affairs.  To see him at them you would think he was some pen-pusher who had lost his soul to Italian book-keeping, so attentive to detail is he.  He takes a holiday on Sundays.  He goes to church.  No heavenly glance or any other sign of the incommensurable betrays him; if one didn’t know him it would be impossible to set him apart from the rest of the crowd; for at most his hearty, lusty psalm-singing proves that he has a good set of lungs.  In the afternoon he takes a walk in the woods.  He delights in everything he sees, in the thronging humanity, the new omnibuses, the Sound - to run across him on Strandveien you would think he was a shop-keeper having his fling, such is his way of taking pleasure; for he is not a poet and I have sought in vain to prise out of him the secret of any poetic incommensurability.  Towards evening he goes home, his step tireless as a postman’s.  On the way it occurs to him that his wife will surely have some special little warm dish for his return, for example roast head of lamb with vegetables.  If he were to meet a kindred spirit, he could continue as far as Østerport so as to converse with him about this dish with a passion befitting a restaurateur.  As it happens he hasn’t a penny and yet he firmly believes his wife has that delicacy waiting for him.  If she has, to see him eat it would be a sight for superior people to envy and for plain folk to be inspired by, for his appetite is greater than Esau’s.  If his wife doesn’t have the dish, curiously enough he is exactly the same.  On the road he passes a building-site and meets another man.  They talk together for a moment, he has a building raised in a jiffy, having all that’s needed for that.  The stranger leaves him thinking: ‘That must have been a capitalist,’ while my admirable knight thinks: ‘Yes, if it came to that I could surely manage it.’ He takes his ease at an open window and looks down on the square where he lives, at everything that goes on - a rat slipping under a board over the gutter, the children at play - with a composure befitting a sixteen-year-old girl.  And yet he is no genius; I have tried in vain to spy out in him the incommensurability of the genius.  He smokes his pipe in the evening: to see him you would swear it was the cheesemonger opposite vegetating in the dusk.  Carefree as a devil-may-care good-for-nothing, he hasn’t a worry in the world, and yet he purchases every moment that he lives, ‘redeeming the seasonable time’ at the dearest price; not the least thing does he do except on the strength of the absurd.  And yet, and yet - yes, it could drive me to fury, out of envy if for no other reason - and yet this man has made and is at every moment making the movement of infinity.  He drains in infinite resignation the deep sorrow of existence, he knows the bliss of infinity, he has felt the pain of renouncing everything, whatever is most precious in the world, and yet to him finitude tastes just as good as to one who has never known anything higher, for his remaining in the finite bore no trace of a stunted, anxious training, and still he has this sense of being secure to take pleasure in it, as though it were the most certain thing of all.  And yet, and yet the whole earthly form he presents is a new creation on the strength of the absurd.  He resigned everything infinitely, and then took everything back on the strength of the absurd.  He is continually making the movement of infinity, but he makes it with such accuracy and poise that he is continually getting finitude out of it, and not for a second would one suspect anything else.  It is said that the dancer’s hardest task is to leap straight into a definite position, so that not for a second does he have to catch at the position but stands there in it in the leap itself.  Perhaps no dancer can do it - but that knight does it.  The mass of humans live disheartened lives of earthly sorrow and joy, these are the sitters-out who will not join in the dance.  The knights of infinity are dancers too and they have elevation.  They make the upward movement and fall down again, and this too is no unhappy pastime, nor ungracious to behold.  But when they come down they cannot assume the position straightaway, they waver an instant and the wavering shows they are nevertheless strangers in the world.  This may be more or less evident, depending on their skill, but even the most skilled of these knights cannot hide the vacillation.  One doesn’t need to see them in the air, one only has to see them the moment they come and have come to earth to recognize them.  But to be able to land in just that way, and in the same second to look as though one was up and walking, to transform the leap in life to a gait, to express the sublime in the pedestrian absolutely - that is something only the knight of faith can do - and it is the one and only marvel.  Yet this marvel can so easily deceive.  I will therefore describe the movements in a particular case which can illustrate the respective relationships to reality, for it is these that everything turns on.  A young lad falls in love with a princess, the content of his whole life lies in this love, and yet the relationship is one that cannot possibly be brought to fruition, be translated from ideality into reality.  2 The slaves of misery, the frogs in life’s swamp, naturally exclaim: ‘Such love is foolishness; the rich brewer’s widow is just as good and sound a match.’ Let them croak away undisturbed in the swamp.  This is not the manner of the knight of infinite resignation, he does not renounce the love, not for all the glory in the world.  He is no trifler.  He first makes sure that this really is the content of his life, and his soul is too healthy and proud to squander the least thing on getting drunk.  He is not cowardly, he is not afraid to let his love steal in upon his most secret, most hidden thoughts, to let it twine itself in countless coils around every ligament of his consciousness - if the love becomes unhappy he will never be able to wrench himself out of it.  He feels a blissful rapture when he lets it tingle through every nerve, and yet his soul is as solemn as his who has emptied the cup of poison and feels the juice penetrate to every drop of blood - for this moment is life and death.  Having thus imbibed all the love and absorbed himself in it, he does not lack the courage to attempt and risk everything.  He reflects over his life’s circumstances, he summons the swift thoughts that like trained doves obey his every signal, he waves his rod over them, and they rush off in all directions.  But now when they all return as messengers of sorrow and explain to him that it is an impossibility, he becomes quiet, he dismisses them, he remains alone, and he performs the movement.  If what I say here has any meaning the movement must take place properly.  3 For the knight will then, in the first place, have the strength to concentrate the whole of his life’s content and the meaning of reality in a single wish.  If a person lacks this concentration, this focus, his soul is disintegrated from the start, and then he will never come to make the movement, he will act prudently in life like those capitalists who invest their capital in every kind of security so as to gain on the one what they lose on the other - in short, he is not a knight.  Secondly, the knight will have the strength to concentrate the whole of the result of his reflection into one act of consciousness.  If he lacks this focus his soul is disintegrated from the start and he will then never have time to make the movement, he will be forever running errands in life, never enter the eternal; for at the very moment he is almost there he will suddenly discover that he has forgotten something and so must go back.  The next moment he will think it possible, and that is also quite correct; but through such considerations one never comes to make the movement; rather with their help one sinks ever deeper into the mire.  So the knight makes the movement, but what movement? Does he want to forget the whole thing? Because in that too there is a kind of concentration.  No! for the knight does not contradict himself, and it is a contradiction to forget the whole of one’s life’s content and still be the same.  He has no inclination to become another, seeing nothing at all great in that prospect.  Only lower natures forget themselves and become something new.  Thus the butterfly has altogether forgotten that it was a caterpillar, perhaps it can so completely forget in turn that it was a butterfly that it can become a fish.  Deeper natures never forget themselves and never become something other than they were.  So the knight will remember everything; but the memory is precisely the pain, and yet in his infinite resignation he is reconciled with existence.  His love for the princess would take on for him the expression of an eternal love, would acquire a religious character, be transfigured into a love for the eternal being which, although it denied fulfilment, still reconciled him once more in the eternal consciousness of his love’s validity in an eternal form that no reality can take from him.  Fools and young people talk about everything being possible for a human being.  But that is a great mistake.  Everything is possible spiritually speaking, but in the finite world there is much that is not possible.  This impossibility the knight nevertheless makes possible by his expressing it spiritually, but he expresses it spiritually by renouncing it.  The desire which would convey him out into reality, but came to grief on an impossibility, now bends inwards but is not lost thereby nor forgotten.  At times it is the unconscious workings of the desire in him which awaken the memory, at others it is he himself that awakens it, for he is too proud to want to let the whole content of his life seem to have been but a fleeting affair of the moment.  He keeps this love young, and it grows with him in years and beauty.  On the other hand, he needs no finite occasion for its growth.  From the moment he made the movement the princess is lost.  He needs none of this erotic titillation of the nerves at the sight of the loved one, etc., nor does he need in a finite sense to be continually making his farewell, for his memory of her is an eternal one, and he knows very well that those lovers who are so eager to see one another one more time to say farewell are right to be eager, right to think it will be the last time; for as soon as may be they will have forgotten one another.  He has grasped the deep secret that even in loving another one should be sufficient unto oneself.  He pays no further finite attention to what the princess does, and just this proves that he has made the movement infinitely.  Here we have the opportunity to see whether the movement in the individual is proper or not.  There was a person who also believed he had made the movement, but time went by, the princess did something else, she married, say, a prince, and his soul lost the resilience of resignation.  He knew then that he had not made the movement correctly; for one who has infinitely resigned is enough unto himself.  The knight does not cancel his resignation, he keeps it, just as young as in the first instance, he never lets it go, simply because he has made the movement infinitely.  What the princess does cannot disturb him, it is only lower natures who have the law for their actions in someone else, the premisses for their actions outside themselves.  If, on the other hand, the princess is similarly disposed there will be a beautiful development.  She will then introduce herself into that order of knighthood whose members are not admitted by ballot but which anyone can join who has the courage to admit him- or herself, that order of knighthood which proves its immortality by making no distinction between man and woman.  She too will keep her love young and sound, she too will have overcome her agony, even though she does not, as the song says, ‘lie by her lord’s side’.  These two will then be suited to each other in all eternity, with such a strict-tempoed harmonia praestabilita pre-established harmony that were some moment to come, a moment with which they were nevertheless not concerned finitely, for in the finite world they would grow old - were such a moment to come which allowed their love its expression in time, then they would be in a position to begin precisely where they would have begun had they been united from the beginning.  The one, whether man or woman, who understands this can never be deceived, for it is only lower natures who imagine they are deceived.  No girl who lacks this pride really knows what it is to love, but if she is so proud, then all the world’s stratagems and ingenuity cannot deceive her.  In infinite resignation there is peace and repose; anyone who wants it, who has not debased himself by - what is still worse than being too proud - belittling himself, can discipline himself into making this movement, which in its pain reconciles one to existence.  Infinite resignation is that shirt in the old fable.  The thread is spun with tears, bleached by tears, the shirt sewn in tears, but then it also gives better protection than iron and steel.  A defect of the fable is that a third party is able to make the material.  The secret in life is that everyone must sew it for himself; and the remarkable thing is that a man can sew it just as well as a woman.  In infinite resignation there is peace and repose and consolation in the pain, that is if the movement is made properly.  I could easily fill a whole book with the various misunderstandings, awkward positions, and slovenly movements I have encountered in just my own slight experience.  People believe very little in spirit, yet it is precisely spirit that is needed to make this movement; what matters is its not being a one-sided result of dira necessitas; the more it is that the more doubtful it always is that the movement is proper.  To insist that a frigid, sterile necessity is necessarily present is to say that no one may experience death before actually dying, which strikes me as crass materialism.  Yet in our time people are less concerned with making pure movements.  Suppose someone wanting to learn to dance said: ‘For hundreds of years now one generation after another has been learning dance steps, it’s high time I took advantage of this and began straight off with a set of quadrilles.’ One would surely laugh a little at him; but in the world of spirit such an attitude is considered utterly plausible.  What then is education? I had thought it was the curriculum the individual ran through in order to catch up with himself; and anyone who does not want to go through this curriculum will be little helped by being born into the most enlightened age.  Infinite resignation is the last stage before faith, so that anyone who has not made this movement does not have faith; for only in infinite resignation does my eternal validity become transparent to me, and only then can there be talk of grasping existence on the strength of faith.  Let us now have the knight of faith make his appearance in the case discussed.  He does exactly the same as the other knight, he infinitely renounces the claim to the love which is the content of his life; he is reconciled in pain; but then comes the marvel, he makes one more movement, more wonderful than anything else, for he says: ‘I nevertheless believe that I shall get her, namely on the strength of the absurd, on the strength of the fact that for God all things are possible.’ The absurd is not one distinction among others embraced by understanding.  It is not the same as the improbable, the unexpected, the unforeseen.  The moment the knight resigned he was convinced of the impossibility, humanly speaking; that was a conclusion of the understanding, and he had energy enough to think it.  In an infinite sense, however, it was possible, through renouncing it as a finite possibility; but then accepting that possibility is at the same time to have given it up, yet for the understanding there is no absurdity in possessing it, for it is only in the finite world that understanding rules and there it was and remains an impossibility.  On this the knight of faith is just as clear; all that can save him is the absurd; and this he grasps by faith.  Accordingly he admits the impossibility and at the same time believes the absurd; for were he to suppose that he had faith without recognizing the impossibility with all the passion of his soul and with all his heart, he would be deceiving himself, and his testimony would carry weight nowhere, since he would not even have come as far as infinite resignation.  Faith is therefore no aesthetic emotion, but something far higher, exactly because it presupposes resignation; it is not the immediate inclination of the heart but the paradox of existence.  Thus that a young girl in the face of all difficulties rests assured that her desire will be fulfilled in no way means that her certainty is that of faith, even if she has been brought up by Christian parents and perhaps gone for a whole year to the pastor.  She is convinced in all her childlike simplicity and innocence.  This assurance too ennobles her nature and gives her a preternatural dimension, so that like a worker of wonders she can charm the finite powers of existence and make even stones weep, while on the other hand in her distraction she can just as well run to Herod as to Pilate and move the whole world with her pleas.  Her conviction is ever so lovable, and one can learn much from her, but one thing one does not learn from her, how to make movements.  Her certainty does not dare look the impossibility in the eye in the pain of resignation.  I can see then that it requires strength and energy and freedom of spirit to make the infinite movement of resignation; I can also see that it can be done.  The next step dumbfounds me, my brain reels; for having made the movement of resignation, now on the strength of the absurd to get everything, to get one’s desire, whole, in full, that requires more-than-human powers, it is a marvel.  But at least I can see this, that the young girl’s conviction is mere frivolity compared with a faith that is unshakeable even when it sees the impossibility.  Whenever I want to make this movement I turn giddy, at the same moment I admire it absolutely and yet in that same instant an immense anxiety seizes my soul, for what is it to test God? And yet this is the movement of faith and remains that, however much philosophy, in order to confuse concepts, will have us suppose that it has faith, however much theology wants to sell it at a bargain price.  Resignation does not require faith, for what I win in resignation is my eternal consciousness, and that is a purely philosophical movement, which I venture upon when necessary, and which I can discipline myself into doing, for every time something finite out-distances me I starve myself until I make the movement; for my eternal consciousness is my love of God, and for me that is higher than anything.  Resignation does not require faith, but it requires faith to get the slightest more than my eternal consciousness, for that more is the paradox.  The movements are often confused.  It is said that faith is needed in order to renounce everything; yes, even more strangely one hears people complain that they have lost faith and on consulting the scale to see where they are, we find curiously enough that they have come no further than the point where they should be making the infinite movement of resignation.  Through resignation I renounce everything, this movement is one I do by myself, and when I do not do it that is because I am cowardly and weak and lack the enthusiasm and have no sense of the importance of the high dignity afforded to every human being, to be his own censor, a dignity greater by far than to be Censor General for the whole Roman Republic.  This movement is one that I make by myself, so what I win is myself in my eternal consciousness, in a blessed compliance with my love for the eternal being.  Through faith I don’t renounce anything, on the contrary in faith I receive everything, exactly in the way it is said what one whose faith is like a mustard seed can move mountains.  It takes a purely human courage to renounce the whole of temporality in order to win eternity, but I do indeed win it and cannot in all eternity renounce that, for that would be a self-contradiction; but it takes a paradoxical and humble courage then to grasp the whole of temporality on the strength of the absurd, and that courage is the courage of faith.  Through faith Abraham did not renounce his claim on Isaac, through his faith he received Isaac.  That rich young man, by virtue of his resignation, should have given everything away, but once he had done so the knight of faith would have to say to him: ‘On the strength of the absurd you shall get every penny back, believe that!’ And these words should by no means be a matter of indifference to the once rich young man; for if he gave his possessions away because he was bored with them, then his resignation was in a sorry state.  Temporality, finitude is what it all turns on.  I am able by my own strength to renounce everything, and then find peace and repose in the pain; I can put up with everything even if that demon, more horrifying than the skull and bones that put terror into men’s hearts - even if madness itself were to hold up the fool’s costume before my eyes and I could tell from its look that it was I who was to put it on; I can still save my soul so long as it is more important for me that my love of God should triumph in me than my worldly happiness.  A man can still, in that last moment, concentrate his whole soul in a single glance towards the heaven from which all good gifts come, and this glance is something both he and the one he seeks understand; it means he has nevertheless remained true to his love.  Then he will calmly put on the costume.  He who lacks this romanticism has sold his soul, whether he received a kingdom for it or a paltry piece of silver.  But by my own strength I cannot get the least little thing of what belongs to finitude; for I am continually using my energy to renounce everything.  By my own strength I can give up the princess, and I shall be no sulker but find joy and peace and repose in my pain, but with my own strength I cannot get her back again, for all that strength is precisely what I use to renounce my claim on her.  But by faith, says that marvellous knight, by faith you will get her on the strength of the absurd.  Alas, this movement is one I cannot make! As soon as I want to begin it everything turns around and I flee back to the pain of resignation.  I can swim in life, but for this mysterious floating I am too heavy.  To exist in such a way that my opposition to existence expresses itself every instant as the most beautiful and safest harmony, that I cannot.  And yet it must be glorious to get the princess, I say so every instant and the knight of resignation who doesn’t say it is a deceiver, he has not had just one desire and he has not kept his desire young in its pain.  Some might find it convenient enough that the desire is no longer alive, that the smart of pain has dulled; but such people are no knights.  A free-born soul who caught himself at this would despise himself and make a fresh start, and above all not allow himself to be deceived in his soul.  And yet it must be wonderful to get the princess, and yet it is only the knight of faith who is happy, only he is heir apparent to the finite, whereas the knight of resignation is a stranger, a foreigner.  To get the princess in this way, to live in joy and happiness, in her company day in and day out - we have to allow, of course, that the knight of resignation, too, may get the princess, even though he has clearly perceived the impossibility of their future happiness - thus to live joyfully and happily in this way every moment on the strength of the absurd, every moment to see the sword hanging over the loved one’s head and yet find, not repose in the pain of resignation, but joy on the strength of the absurd - that is wonderful.  The one who does that, he is great, the only great one, the thought of it stirs my soul, which was never sparing in its admiration of greatness.  Now if everyone in my generation unwilling to stop at faith is really someone who has understood life’s horror, has grasped Daub’s meaning when he says that a soldier standing guard alone with a loaded gun by a powder magazine on a stormy night gets strange thoughts; if all those unwilling to stop at faith really are people who possess the strength of soul to grasp, and give themselves time to be alone with, the thought that what they wished was impossible; if all who are unwilling to stop at faith have really reconciled themselves in pain and been reconciled by pain; if all those unwilling to stop at faith have in addition (and unless they have done all this other they need not trouble themselves in matters of faith) performed that marvel, grasped the whole of existence on the strength of the absurd - then what I am writing is a speech in the highest praise of my generation by the least in it, by the one who could only make the movement of resignation.  But why will they not stop at faith, why do we sometimes hear of people blushing to admit they have faith? That I cannot grasp.  Should I ever come so far as to manage this movement, I’d drive thereafter with a coach-and-four.  Is it really the case, can all the bourgeois philistinism I see in life, and which I allow only my deeds and not my words to condemn, really be not what it seems? Is it really this marvel? That is certainly conceivable, for our hero of faith did indeed bear a striking resemblance to it, for our hero of faith was not even an ironist and humorist but something still higher.  A lot is said in our time about irony and humour, particularly by people who have never succeeded in practising them but who nevertheless know how to explain everything.  I am not altogether unfamiliar with these two passions, I know a little more about them than is to be found in German and German Danish compendia.  Therefore I know that these two passions differ essentially from the passion of faith.  Irony and humour reflect also upon themselves and so belong in the sphere of infinite resignation, they owe their resilience to the individual’s incommensurability with reality.  The last movement, the paradoxical movement of faith I cannot perform, be it a duty or whatever - though in fact I would be most willing to do it.  Whether anyone has the right to say this must be up to him; it is a matter between him and the eternal being who is the object of faith whether he can reach an amicable agreement in this respect.  What everyone can do, on the other hand, is perform the infinite movement of resignation, and I for my part would not think twice about pronouncing anyone a coward who thinks he can’t.  With faith it is another matter.  But what no one has the right to do is let others suppose that faith is something inferior or that it is an easy matter, when in fact it is the greatest and most difficult of all.  Some understand the story of Abraham in another way.  They praise God’s mercy for giving him Isaac once again, the whole thing was just a trial.  A trial - that can say a lot or little, yet the whole thing is as quickly done with as said.  One mounts a winged horse, that very instant one is on the mountain in Moriah, the same instant one sees the ram.  One forgets that Abraham rode on an ass, which can keep up no more than a leisurely pace, that he had a three-day journey, that he needed time to chop the firewood, bind Isaac, and sharpen the knife.  And yet one praises Abraham! The speaker might just as well sleep until fifteen minutes before speaking, his hearer might just as well sleep throughout the speech, since it all goes so smoothly, without trouble from either side.  Should someone present be suffering from insomnia, that person might go home, sit down in a corner, and think: ‘It’s all over in a second, if you’ll just wait a minute you’ll see the ram and the trial is over.’ Were the speaker to meet him in that state then I imagine he would advance on him in all his dignity and say: ‘Wretch, that you can let your soul sink into such folly; there is no miracle, and all life is a trial.’ The more effusive the speaker became the more heated he would grow and the better pleased with himself, and while he had noticed no congestion of the blood when speaking about Abraham, he could now feel the vein swelling on his forehead.  He might perhaps be struck dumb were the sinner, calmly and with dignity, to reply: ‘But that’s what you preached last Sunday.’ So let us either forget all about Abraham or learn how to be horrified at the monstrous paradox which is the significance of his life, so that we can understand that our time like any other can be glad if it has faith.  If Abraham is not a nonentity, a ghost, a piece of pomp one uses to pass time away, the mistake can never lie in the sinner’s wanting to do like him; rather it is a question of seeing the greatness of Abraham’s deed, so that the person may judge for himself whether he has the inclination and courage to be tried in such a thing.  The comic contradiction in the speaker’s behaviour was that he made Abraham into something insignificant and yet would forbid the other from carrying on in the same manner.  Should one perhaps not dare to speak about Abraham? I think one should.  If I myself were to talk about him I would first depict the pain of the trial.  For that I would suck all the fear, distress, and torment out of the father’s suffering, like a leech, in order to be able to describe all that Abraham suffered while still believing.  I would remind people that the journey lasted three days and well into the fourth; yes, those three-and-a-half days should be infinitely longer than the two thousand years separating me from Abraham.  Then I would remind them that everyone, as I believe, should feel able to change their mind before beginning on such a thing, that it is possible at every moment to retract and turn back.  If one does this I see no danger; nor am I afraid of arousing a desire in people to be put to the test like Abraham.  But if one wants to market a cut-price version of Abraham and then still admonish people not to do what Abraham did, then that’s just laughable.  What I intend now is to extract from the story of Abraham its dialectical element, in the form of problemata, in order to see how monstrous a paradox faith is, a paradox capable of making a murder into a holy act well pleasing to God, a paradox which gives Isaac back to Abraham, which no thought can grasp because faith begins precisely where thinking leaves off.  Fear and Trembling Søren Kierkegaard 1813-1855 Fear and Trembling Speech in Praise of Abraham If there were no eternal consciousness in a man, if at the bottom of everything there were only a wild ferment, a power that twisting in dark passions produced everything great or inconsequential; if an unfathomable, insatiable emptiness lay hid beneath everything, what would life be but despair? If it were thus, if there were no sacred bond uniting mankind, if one generation rose up after another like the leaves of the forest, if one generation succeeded the other as the songs of birds in the woods, if the human race passed through the world as a ship through the sea or the wind through the desert, a thoughtless and fruitless whim, if an eternal oblivion always lurked hungrily for its prey and there were no power strong enough to wrest it from its clutches - how empty and devoid of comfort would life be! But for that reason it is not so, and as God created man and woman, so too he shaped the hero and the poet or speech-maker.  The latter has none of the skills of the former, he can only admire, love, take pleasure in the hero.  Yet he, too, no less than the hero, is happy; for the hero is so to speak that better nature of his in which he is enamoured, though happy that it is not himself, that his love can indeed be admiration.  He is the spirit of remembrance, can only bring to mind what has been done, do nothing but admire what has been done.  He takes nothing of himself, but is jealous of his charge.  He follows his heart’s desire, but having found what he sought he wanders round to everyone’s door with his song and his speech, so that all can admire the hero as he does, be proud of the hero as he is.  That is his achievement, his humble task, this his faithful service in the hero’s house.  If he remains thus true to his love, if he struggles night and day against the wiles of oblivion, which would cheat him of his hero, then he has fulfilled his task, he is united with the hero who in his turn has loved him just as faithfully, for the poet is so to speak the hero’s better nature, ineffectual certainly as a memory is, but also transfigured as a memory is.  Therefore no one who was great will be forgotten: and however long it takes, even if a cloud of misunderstanding should take the hero away, his lover still comes, and the more time goes by the more faithfully he sticks by him.  No! No one shall be forgotten who was great in this world; but everyone was great in his own way, and everyone in proportion to the greatness of what he loved.  For he who loved himself became great in himself, and he who loved others became great through his devotion, but he who loved God became greater than all.  They shall all be remembered, but everyone became great in proportion to his expectancy.  One became great through expecting the possible, another by expecting the eternal; but he who expected the impossible became greater than all.  They shall all be remembered, but everyone was great in proportion to the magnitude of what he strove with.  For he who strove with the world became great by conquering the world, and he who strove with himself became greater by conquering himself; but he who strove with God became greater than all.  Thus there was strife in the world, man against man, one against thousands, but he who strove with God was greater than all.  Thus there was strife upon earth: there was he who conquered everything by his own strength, and he who conquered God by his powerlessness.  There was one who relied upon himself and gained everything, and one who, secure in his own strength, sacrificed everything; but greater than all was the one who believed God.  There was one who was great in his strength, and one who was great in his wisdom, and one who was great in hope, and one who was great in love; but greater than all was Abraham, great with that power whose strength is powerlessness, great in that wisdom whose secret is folly, great in that hope whose outward form is insanity, great in that love which is hatred of self.  It was by his faith that Abraham could leave the land of his fathers to become a stranger in the land of promise.  He left one thing behind, took another with him.  He left behind his worldly understanding and took with him his faith.  Otherwise he would surely not have gone; certainly it would have been senseless to do so.  It was by his faith that he could be a stranger in the promised land; there was nothing to remind him of what was dear, but the novelty of everything tempted his soul to sad longing.  And yet he was God’s chosen, in whom the Lord was well pleased! Yes, indeed! If only he had been disowned, cast out from God’s grace, he would have understood it better.  As it was it looked more like a mockery of himself and his faith.  There was once another who lived in exile from the beloved land of his fathers.  He is not forgotten, nor his songs of lament in which in sorrow he sought and found what he had lost.  From Abraham we have no song of lament.  It is human to complain, human to weep with one who weeps, but it is greater to have faith and more blessed to behold the believer.  It was faith that made Abraham accept the promise that all nations of the earth should be blessed in his seed.  Time went by, the possibility was still there, and Abraham had faith; time went by, it became unlikely, and Abraham had faith.  There was once another who held out an expectation.  Time went by, the evening drew near, he was not so pitiful as to forget his expectation; therefore he too should not be forgotten.  Then he sorrowed, and the sorrow did not deceive him as life had done; it did all it could for him and in the sweetness of sorrow he possessed his disappointed expectation.  It is human to sorrow with the sorrower, but greater to have faith and more blessed to behold the believer.  From Abraham we have no song of sorrow.  As time went by he did not mournfully count the days, he did not cast suspicious glances at Sarah, fearing she was growing old; he did not stay the march of the sun, so that Sarah should not grow old and with her his expectation; he did not soothingly sing to Sarah his mournful lay.  Abraham became old and Sarah was mocked in the land, and still he was God’s chosen and heir to the promise that in his seed all nations of the earth would be blessed.  Would it not be better, then, were he not God’s chosen? What is it to be God’s chosen? Is it to be denied in youth one’s youthful desire in order to have it fulfilled in great travail in old age? But Abraham believed and held firm to the promise.  Had Abraham wavered he would have renounced it.  He would have said to God: ‘So perhaps after all it is not your will that it should happen; then I will give up my desire, it was my only desire, my blessed joy.  My soul is upright, I bear no secret grudge because you refused it.’ He would not have been forgotten, he would have saved many by his example, yet he would not have become the father of faith; for it is great to give up one’s desire, but greater to stick to it after having given it up; it is great to grasp hold of the eternal but greater to stick to the temporal after having given it up.  But then came the fullness of time.  Had Abraham not had faith, then Sarah would surely have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dull with grief, instead of understanding the fulfilment, would have smiled at it as at a youthful dream.  But Abraham believed, and therefore he was young; for he who always hopes for the best becomes old, deceived by life, and he who is always prepared for the worst becomes old prematurely; but he who has faith, retains eternal youth.  All praise then to that tale! For Sarah, though stricken in years, was young enough to covet the pleasure of motherhood; and Abraham, though grey of head, was young enough to want to be a father.  Outwardly the wonder of faith is in Abraham and Sarah’s being young enough for it to happen according to their expectations; in a deeper sense the wonder of faith lies in Abraham and Sarah’s being young enough to wish, and in faith’s having preserved their wish and through it their youthfulness.  He accepted the fulfilment of the promise, he accepted it in faith, and it happened according to expectation and according to faith; for Moses struck the rock with his rod but he did not believe.  So there was rejoicing in Abraham’s house when Sarah was bride on their golden-wedding day.  But it was not to remain so; Abraham was to be tried once more.  He had fought with that subtle power that invents everything, with that watchful opponent that never takes a nap, with that old man who outlives everything - time itself.  He had fought with it and kept his faith.  Now all the horrors of the struggle were to be concentrated in one moment.  ‘And God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him ...  Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.’ So all was lost, more terrible than if it had never been! So the Lord was only making sport of Abraham! Through a miracle he had made the preposterous come true, now he would see it again brought to nothing.  Foolery indeed! But Abraham did not laugh at it, as Sarah had laughed when the promise had first been proclaimed.  All was lost! Seventy years’ faithful expectation, the brief joy at faith’s fulfilment.  Who is it then that snatches the staff from the old man, who is it that demands that the old man himself should break it? Who is it that makes a man’s grey hairs forlorn, who is it that demands that he himself should make them so? Is there no compassion for this venerable greybeard, none for the innocent child? And yet Abraham was God’s chosen, and it was the Lord who put him to this test.  All was now surely lost! The glorious memory of the human race, the promise in Abraham’s seed, it was only a whim, a fleeting thought of the Lord‘s, which Abraham himself must now eradicate.  That glorious treasure, as old as the faith in Abraham’s heart, many many years older than Isaac, the fruit of Abraham’s life, hallowed with prayers, ripened in struggle - the blessing on Abraham’s lips, this fruit was now to be plucked out of season and have no meaning; for what meaning could there be in it if Isaac was to be sacrificed! That sad yet still blessed hour when Abraham should take leave of everything he held dear, when he should raise his venerable head one time more, when his countenance should be radiant as the Lord’s, when he should concentrate his whole soul in a blessing with the power to give Isaac joy all his days - that moment was not to come! For, yes, Abraham would indeed take leave of Isaac, but it was he that was to remain; death would divide them, but Isaac was to be its victim.  The old man was not to lay his hand upon Isaac in blessing, but weary of life was to lay it upon him in violence.  And it was God who tried him.  Yes.  Woe, woe to the messenger who came before Abraham with such tidings! Who would have dared be the emissary of such sorrow? Yet it was God who tried Abraham.  But Abraham had faith, and had faith for this life.  Yes, had his faith only been for a future life it would indeed have been easier to cast everything aside in order to hasten out of this world to which he did not belong.  But Abraham’s faith was not of that kind, if there is such, for a faith like that is not really faith but only its remotest possibility, a faith that has some inkling of its object at the very edge of the field of vision but remains separated from it by a yawning abyss in which despair plays its pranks.  But it was for this life that Abraham believed, he believed he would become old in his land, honoured among his people, blessed in his kin, eternally remembered in Isaac, the dearest in his life, whom he embraced with a love for which it was but a poor expression to say that he faithfully fulfilled the father’s duty to love the son, as indeed the summons put it: ‘the son whom thou lovest.’ Jacob had twelve sons and he loved one; Abraham had just one, the son he loved.  But Abraham had faith and did not doubt.  He believed the ridiculous.  If Abraham had doubted - then he would have done something else, something great and glorious; for how could Abraham have done other than what is great and glorious? He would have marched out to the mountain in Moriah, chopped the firewood, set light to the fire, drawn the knife - he would have cried out to God: ‘Do not scorn this sacrifice, it is not the best I possess, that I well know; for what is an old man compared with the child of promise, but it is the best I can give.  Let Isaac never come to know, that he may comfort himself in his young years.’ He would have thrust the knife into his own breast.  He would have been admired in the world and his name never forgotten; but it is one thing to be admired, another to be a guiding star that saves the anguished.  But Abraham had faith.  He did not beg for himself in hope of moving the Lord; it was only that time when the just punishment had been proclaimed upon Sodom and Gomorrah that Abraham came forward with his prayers.  We read in those Holy Scriptures: ‘And God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: Abraham, where are you? but Abraham answered: here I am.’ You, to whom my speech is addressed, was that the case with you? When you saw, far off, the heavy fate approaching, did you not say to the mountains, ‘hide me’, to the hills, ‘fall on me’? Or if you were stronger, did your feet nevertheless not drag along the way? Did they not hanker, as it were, to get back into the old tracks? When you were called, did you answer, or did you not? Perhaps softly and in a whisper? Not so Abraham, gladly, boldly, trustingly he answered out loud ‘here I am’.  We read further: ‘And Abraham rose up early in the morning.’ He hurried as though to some celebration, and he was at the appointed place, the mountain in Moriah, early in the morning.  He said nothing to Sarah, nothing to Eleazar.  After all, who could have understood him? Hadn’t the test by its very nature exacted an oath of silence from him? ‘And he clave the wood, he bound Isaac, he kindled the fire, he drew the knife.’ My hearer! Many a father has felt the loss of his child as the loss of the dearest thing he has in the world, to be bereft of every hope for the future; yet no son was the child of promise in the sense that Isaac was for Abraham.  Many a father has lost his child, but then it was God, the unchangeable and inscrutable will of the Almighty, it was his hand that took it.  Not so with Abraham.  For him a harder trial was reserved; along with the knife the fate of Isaac was put into Abraham’s own hand.  And he stood there, the old man with his only hope! But he did not doubt, he did not look in anguish to left or right, he did not challenge heaven with his prayers.  He knew it was God the Almighty that tried him, he knew it was the hardest sacrifice that could be demanded of him; but he also knew that no sacrifice was too hard when God demanded it - and he drew the knife.  Who gave strength to Abraham’s arm, who kept his right arm raised so that it did not fall helplessly down! Anyone who saw this would be paralysed.  Who gave strength to Abraham’s soul, so that his eye did not become too clouded to see either Isaac or the ram! Anyone who saw this would become blind.  And yet rare enough though they may be, those who are both paralysed and blind, still more rare is he who can tell the story and give it its due.  We know it, all of us - it was only a trial.  Had Abraham doubted as he stood on the mountain in Moriah, had he looked about in indecision, if before drawing the knife he had accidentally caught sight of the ram and God had allowed him to offer it in place of Isaac - then he would have gone home, everything would have been as before, he would have had Sarah, he would have kept Isaac, and yet how changed! For his withdrawal would have been a flight, his deliverance an accident, his reward dishonour, his future perhaps damnation.  Then he would have borne witness, not to his faith or to God’s mercy, but to how dreadful was the journey to the mountain in Moriah.  Abraham would not be forgotten, nor the mountain.  Yet it would not be mentioned like Ararat, where the Ark came to land, but as a horror, for it was here that Abraham doubted.  Venerable Father Abraham! When you journeyed home from the mountain in Moriah you needed no speech of praise to console you for what was lost; for in fact you gained everything and kept Isaac.  Was it not so? The Lord never again took him from you, you sat happily at table with him in your tent, as you do in the hereafter in all eternity.  Venerable Father Abraham! Thousands of years have slipped by since those days, but you need no late-coming lover to snatch your memory from the power of oblivion; for every mother-tongue commemorates you - and still you reward your lover more gloriously than anyone.  You make him blessed hereafter in your bosom, you captivate his eye and his heart in the here and now with the marvel of your deed.  Venerable Father Abraham! Second father to the human race! You who first saw and bore witness to that tremendous passion that scorns the fearful struggle with the raging elements and the forces of creation in order to struggle with God instead, you who first knew that supreme passion, the sacred, pure, and humble expression of the divine madness which the pagans admired - forgive him who would speak in your praise if he did not do it correctly.  He spoke humbly, seeing it is his heart’s desire; he spoke briefly, as is fitting; but he will never forget that you needed a hundred years to get the son of your old age, against every expectation, that you had to draw the knife before keeping Isaac; he will never forget that in one hundred and thirty years you got no further than faith.  Fear and Trembling Problemata Fear and Trembling Preface Not just in commerce but in the world of ideas too our age is putting on a veritable clearance sale.  Everything can be had so dirt cheap that one begins to wonder whether in the end anyone will want to make a bid.  Every speculative score-keeper who conscientiously marks up the momentous march of modem philosophy, every lecturer, crammer, student, everyone on the outskirts of philosophy or at its centre is unwilling to stop with doubting everything.  They all go further.  It would perhaps be malapropos to inquire where they think they are going, though surely we may in all politeness and respect take it for granted that they have indeed doubted everything, otherwise it would be odd to talk of going further.  This preliminary step is one they have all of them taken, and presumably with so little effort as to feel no need to drop some word about how; for not even someone genuinely anxious for a little enlightenment on this will find such.  Not a gesture that might point him in the right direction, no small dietary prescription for how to go about such a huge task.  ‘But Descartes did it, didn’t he?’ A venerable, humble, honest thinker whose writings surely no one can read without being most deeply stirred - Descartes must have done what he has said and said what he has done.  A rare enough occurrence in our own time! Descartes, as he himself repeatedly insists, was no doubter in matters of faith.  (‘But we must keep in mind what has been said, that we must trust to this natural light only so long as nothing contrary to it is revealed by God himself ...  Above all we should impress on our memory as an infallible rule that what God has revealed to us is incomparably more certain than anything else; and that we ought to submit to the Divine authority rather than to our own judgement even though the light of reason may seem to us to suggest, with the utmost clearness and evidence, something opposite’ from Principles 28 and 76 of Principles of Philosophy.) Descartes has not cried ‘Fire!’ and made it everyone’s duty to doubt, for Descartes was a quiet and lonely thinker, not a bellowing streetwatch; he was modest enough to allow that his method was important only for himself and sprang partly from his own earlier bungling with knowledge.  (‘Thus my design here is not to teach the Method which everyone should follow in order to promote the good conduct of Reason, but only to show in what manner I have endeavoured to conduct my own ...  But so soon as I had achieved the entire course of study that is, of his youth - Johannes de silentio’s interpolation at the close of which one is usually received into the ranks of the learned, I entirely changed my opinion.  For I found myself embarrassed with so many doubts and errors that it seemed to me that the effort to instruct myself had no effect other than the increasing discovery of my own ignorance’ Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting the Reason and Seeking the Truth in the Sciences .) - What those old Greeks, whom one must also credit with a little knowledge of philosophy, took to be the task of a whole lifetime, doubt not being a skill one acquires in days and weeks; what the old veteran warrior achieved after keeping the balance of doubt in the face of all inveiglements, fearlessly rejecting the certainties of sense and thought, incorruptibly defying selfish anxieties and the wheedling of sympathies - that is where nowadays everyone begins.  Today nobody will stop with faith; they all go further.  It would perhaps be rash to inquire where to, but surely a mark of urbanity and good breeding on my part to assume that in fact everyone does indeed have faith, otherwise it would be odd to talk of going further.  In those old days it was different.  For then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, not a skill thought to be acquired in either days or weeks.  When the old campaigner approached the end, had fought the good fight, and kept his faith, his heart was still young enough not to have forgotten the fear and trembling that disciplined his youth and which, although the grown man mastered it, no man altogether outgrows - unless he somehow manages at the earliest possible opportunity to go further.  Where these venerable figures arrived our own age begins, in order to go further.  The present author is no philosopher, he has not understood the System, nor does he know if there really is one, or if it has been completed.  As far as his own weak head is concerned the thought of what huge heads everyone must have in order to have such huge thoughts is already enough.  Even if one were able to render the whole of the content of faith into conceptual form, it would not follow that one had grasped faith, grasped how one came to it, or how it came to one.  The present author is no philosopher, he is poetice et eleganter to put it in poetic and well-chosen terms, an occasional copyist who neither writes the System nor makes any promises about it, who pledges neither anything about the System nor himself to it.  He writes because for him doing so is a luxury, the more agreeable and conspicuous the fewer who buy and read what he writes.  In an age where passion has been done away with for the sake of science he easily foresees his fate - in an age when an author who wants readers must be careful to write in a way that he can be comfortably leafed through during the after-dinner nap, and be sure to present himself to the world like the polite gardener’s boy in the Advertiser who, hat in hand and with good references from his previous place of employment, recommends himself to a much-esteemed public.  He foresees his fate will be to be completely ignored; has a dreadful foreboding that the scourge of zealous criticism will more than once make itself felt; and shudders at what terrifies him even more, that some enterprising recorder, a paragraph swallower who to rescue learning is always willing to do to others’ writings what, to ‘preserve good taste’, Trop nobly did to The Destruction of the Human Race, will slice him into sections as ruthlessly as the man who, in the service of the science of punctuation, divided up his speech by counting the words and putting a full-stop after every fifty and a semi-colon after every thirty-five.  No, I prostrate myself before any systematic bag-searcher; this is not the System, it hasn’t the slightest thing to do with the System.  I wish all good on the System and on the Danish shareholders in that omnibus; for it will hardly become a tower.  I wish them good luck and prosperity one and all.  Respectfully Johannes de silentio Fear and Trembling Attunement There was once a man; he had learned as a child that beautiful tale of how God tried Abraham, how he withstood the test, kept his faith and for the second time received a son against every expectation.  When he became older he read the same story with even greater admiration, for life had divided what had been united in the child’s pious simplicity.  The older he became the more often his thoughts turned to that tale, his enthusiasm became stronger and stronger, and yet less and less could he understand it.  Finally it put everything else out of his mind; his soul had but one wish, actually to see Abraham, and one longing, to have been witness to those events.  It was not the beautiful regions of the East, nor the earthly splendour of the Promised Land, he longed to see, not the God-fearing couple whose old age God had blessed, not the venerable figure of the patriarch stricken in years, not the youthful vigour God gave to Isaac - it would have been the same if it had taken place on a barren heath.  What he yearned for was to accompany them on the three-day journey, when Abraham rode with grief before him and Isaac by his side.  He wanted to be there at that moment when Abraham raised his eyes and saw in the distance the mountain in Moriah, the moment he left the asses behind and went on up the mountain alone with Isaac.  For what occupied him was not the finely wrought fabric of imagination, but the shudder of thought.  This man was no thinker, he felt no need to go further than faith.  To be remembered as its father seemed to him to be surely the greatest glory of all, and to have it a lot to be envied even if no one else knew.  This man was no learned exegete, he knew no Hebrew; had he known Hebrew then perhaps it might have been easy for him to understand the story of Abraham.  I And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him ...  Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.  It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, had the asses saddled and left his tent, taking Isaac with him, but Sarah watched them from the window as they went down the valley until she could see them no more.  They rode in silence for three days; on the morning of the fourth Abraham still said not a word, but raised his eyes and saw afar the mountain in Moriah.  He left the servants behind and went on alone up the mountain with Isaac beside him.  But Abraham said to himself: ‘I won’t conceal from Isaac where this way is leading him.’ He stood still, laid his hand on Isaac’s head to give him his blessing, and Isaac bent down to receive it.  And Abraham’s expression was fatherly, his gaze gentle, his speech encouraging.  But Isaac could not understand him, his soul could not be uplifted; he clung to Abraham’s knees, pleaded at his feet, begged for his young life, for his fair promise; he called to mind the joy in Abraham’s house, reminded him of the sorrow and loneliness.  Then Abraham lifted the boy up and walked with him, taking him by the hand, and his words were full of comfort and exhortation.  But Isaac could not understand him.  Abraham climbed the mountain in Moriah, but Isaac did not understand him.  Then he turned away from Isaac for a moment, but when Isaac saw his face a second time it was changed, his gaze was wild, his mien one of horror.  He caught Isaac by the chest, threw him to the ground and said: ‘Foolish boy, do you believe I am your father? I am an idolater.  Do you believe this is God’s command? No, it is my own desire.’ Then Isaac trembled and in his anguish cried: ‘God in heaven have mercy on me, God of Abraham have mercy on me; if I have no father on earth, then be Thou my father!’ But below his breath Abraham said to himself: ‘Lord in heaven I thank Thee; it is after all better that he believe I am a monster than that he lose faith in Thee.’ When the child is to be weaned the mother blackens her breast, for it would be a shame were the breast to look pleasing when the child is not to have it.  So the child believes that the breast has changed but the mother is the same, her look loving and tender as ever.  Lucky the one that needed no more terrible means to wean the child! II It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, embraced Sarah, the bride of his old age, and Sarah kissed Isaac, who had taken her disgrace from her, was her pride and hope for all generations.  So they rode on in silence and Abraham’s eyes were fixed on the ground, until the fourth day when he looked up and saw afar the mountain in Moriah, but he turned his gaze once again to the ground.  Silently he arranged the fire-wood, bound Isaac; silently he drew the knife.  Then he saw the ram that God had appointed.  He sacrificed that and returned home ...  From that day on, Abraham became old, he could not forget that God had demanded this of him.  Isaac throve as before; but Abraham’s eye was darkened, he saw joy no more.  When the child has grown and is to be weaned the mother virginally covers her breast, so the child no more has a mother.  Lucky the child that lost its mother in no other way! III It was early morning.  Abraham rose in good time, kissed Sarah the young mother, and Sarah kissed Isaac, her delight, her joy for ever.  And Abraham rode thoughtfully on.  He thought of Hagar and of the son whom he had driven out into the desert.  He climbed the mountain in Moriah, he drew the knife.  It was a tranquil evening when Abraham rode out alone, and he rode to the mountain in Moriah: he threw himself on his face, he begged God to forgive his sin at having been willing to sacrifice Isaac, at the father’s having forgotten his duty to his son.  He rode more frequently on his lonely way, but found no peace.  He could not comprehend that it was a sin to have been willing to sacrifice to God the best he owned; that for which he would many a time have gladly laid down his own life; and if it was a sin, if he had not so loved Isaac, then he could not understand that it could be forgiven; for what sin was more terrible? When the child is to be weaned the mother too is not without sorrow, that she and the child grow more and more apart; that the child which first lay beneath her heart, yet later rested at her breast, should no longer be so close.  Thus together they suffer this brief sorrow.  Lucky the one who kept the child so close and had no need to sorrow more! IV It was early morning.  Everything had been made ready for the journey in Abraham’s house.  Abraham took leave of Sarah, and the faithful servant Eleazar followed him out on the way until he had to turn back.  They rode together in accord, Abraham and Isaac, until they came to the mountain in Moriah.  Yet Abraham made everything ready for the sacrifice, calmly and quietly, but as he turned away Isaac saw that Abraham’s left hand was clenched in anguish, that a shudder went through his body - but Abraham drew the knife.  Then they turned home again and Sarah ran to meet them, but Isaac had lost his faith.  Never a word in the whole world is spoken of this, and Isaac told no one what he had seen, and Abraham never suspected that anyone had seen it.  When the child is to be weaned the mother has more solid food at hand, so that the child will not perish.  Lucky the one who has more solid food at hand! In these and similar ways this man of whom we speak thought about those events.  Every time he came home from a journey to the mountain in Moriah he collapsed in weariness, clasped his hands, and said: ‘Yet no one was as great as Abraham; who is able to understand him?’ Fear and Trembling Fear and Trembling What Tarquin the Proud said in his garden with the poppy blooms was understood by the son but not by the messenger.  HAMANN Fear and Trembling Epilogue Once when the spice market in Holland was a little slack, the merchants had some cargoes dumped at sea to force up the price.  That was a pardonable, perhaps necessary, stratagem.  Is it something similar we need in the world of spirit? Are we so convinced of having reached the heights that there is nothing left but piously to believe we still haven’t come that far, so as at least to have something to fill the time with? Is it this kind of trick of self-deception the present generation needs, is it to a virtuosity in this it should be educated, or has it not already perfected itself sufficiently in the art of self-deception? Or is what it needs not rather an honest seriousness which fearlessly and incorruptibly calls attention to the tasks, an honest seriousness that lovingly fences the tasks about, which does not frighten people into wanting to dash precipitately to the heights, but keeps the tasks young and beautiful and charming to behold, and inviting to all, yet hard too and an inspiration to noble minds, since noble natures are only inspired by difficulty? However much one generation learns from another, it can never learn from its predecessor the genuinely human factor.  In this respect every generation begins afresh, has no task other than that of any previous generation, and comes no further, provided the latter hasn’t shirked its task and deceived itself.  This authentically human factor is passion, in which the one generation also fully understands the other and understands itself.  Thus no generation has learned from another how to love, no generation can begin other than at the beginning, the task of no later generation is shorter than its predecessor’s, and if someone, unlike the previous generation, is unwilling to stay with love but wants to go further, then that is simply idle and foolish talk.  But the highest passion in a human being is faith, and here no generation begins other than where its predecessor did, every generation begins from the beginning, the succeeding generation comes no further than the previous one, provided the latter was true to its task and didn’t betray it.  That this sounds wearying is not of course for the generation to say, for it is indeed the generation that has the task and it has nothing to do with the fact that the previous generation had the same task, unless that particular generation or the individuals in it presumed to occupy the position to which only the spirit that governs the world, and which has the endurance not to grow weary, is entitled.  If that is the kind of thing the generation begins to do, it is perverted, and what wonder then if the whole of existence should look perverted to it? For surely no one has found life more perverted than the tailor in the fairy-tale who got to heaven in his lifetime and from there looked down on the world.  So long as the generation only worries about its task, which is the highest it can attain to, it cannot grow weary.  That task is always enough for a human lifetime.  When children on holiday get through all their games by noon and then ask impatiently, ‘Can’t anyone think of a new game?’, does this show that they are more developed and advanced than children of the same or a previous generation who could make the games they already know last the whole day? Or does it not rather show that those children lack what I would call the good-natured seriousness that belongs to play? Faith is the highest passion in a human being.  Many in every generation may not come that far, but none comes further.  Whether there are also many who do not discover it in our own age I leave open.  I can only refer to my own experience, that of one who makes no secret of the fact that he has far to go, yet without therefore wishing to deceive either himself or what is great by reducing this latter to a triviality, to a children’s disease which one must hope to get over as soon as possible.  But life has tasks enough, even for one who fails to come as far as faith, and when he loves these honestly life won’t be a waste either, even if it can never compare with that of those who had a sense of the highest and grasped it.  But anyone who comes to faith (whether he be greatly talented or simple-minded makes no difference) won’t remain at a standstill there.  Indeed he would be shocked if anyone said this to him.  Just as the lover would be indignant if someone said he had come to a standstill in his love, for he would reply, ‘I’m by no means standing still in my love, for I have my life in it.’ And yet he too doesn’t come any further, not to anything else.  For when he finds that out he has another explanation.  ‘One must go further, one must go further.’ This need to go on is of ancient standing.  Heraclitus the ‘obscure’ who reposited his thoughts in his writings and his writings in the Temple of Diana (for his thoughts had been his armour in life, which he therefore hung up in the temple of the goddess), the obscure Heraclitus has said, ‘One can never walk through the same river twice.‘ 16 The obscure Heraclitus had a disciple who didn’t remain standing there but went further and added, ‘One cannot do it even once.’† Poor Heraclitus to have such a disciple! This improvement changed the Heraclitian principle into an Eleatic doctrine denying movement, and yet all that disciple wanted was to be a disciple of Heraclitus who went further, not back to what Heraclitus had abandoned.  Fear and Trembling Problema I Is There a Teleological Suspension of the Ethical? The ethical as such is the universal, and as the universal it applies to everyone, which can be put from another point of view by saying that it applies at every moment.  It rests immanently in itself, has nothing outside itself that is its telos end, purpose but is itself the telos for everything outside, and when that is taken up into it, it has no further to go.  Seen as an immediate, no more than sensate and psychic, being, the single individual is the particular that has its telos in the universal, and the individual’s ethical task is always to express himself in this, to abrogate his particularity so as to become the universal.  As soon as the single individual wants to assert himself in his particularity, in direct opposition to the universal, he sins, and only by recognizing this can he again reconcile himself with the universal.  Whenever, having entered the universal, the single individual feels an urge to assert his particularity, he is in a state of temptation, from which he can extricate himself only by surrendering his particularity to the universal in repentance.  If that is the highest that can be said of man and his existence, then the ethical and a person’s eternal blessedness, which is his telos in all eternity and at every moment, are identical; for in that case it would be a contradiction to say that one surrendered that telos (i.e.  suspended it teleologically) since by suspending the telos one would be forfeiting it, while what is said to be suspended in this sense is not forfeited but preserved in something higher, the latter being precisely its telos.  If that is the case, then Hegel is right in his ‘Good and Conscience’ where he discusses man seen merely as the single individual and regards this way of seeing him as a ‘moral form of evil’ to be annulled in the teleology of the ethical life, so that the individual who stays at this stage is either in sin or in a state of temptation.  Where Hegel goes wrong, on the other hand, is in talking about faith, in not protesting loudly and clearly against the honour and glory enjoyed by Abraham as the father of faith when he should really be remitted to some lower court for trial and exposed as a murderer.  For faith is just this paradox, that the single individual is higher than the universal, though in such a way, be it noted, that the movement is repeated, that is, that, having been in the universal, the single individual now sets himself apart as the particular above the universal.  If that is not faith, then Abraham is done for and faith has never existed in the world, just because it has always existed.  For if the ethical life is the highest and nothing incommensurable is left over in man, except in the sense of what is evil, i.e.  the single individual who is to be expressed in the universal, then one needs no other categories than those of the Greek philosophers, or whatever can be logically deduced from them.  This is something Hegel, who has after all made some study of the Greeks, ought not to have kept quiet about.  One not infrequently hears people who prefer to lose themselves in clichés rather than studies say that light shines over the Christian world, while paganism is shrouded in darkness.  This kind of talk has always struck me as strange, since any reasonably deep thinker, any reasonably serious artist will still seek rejuvenation in the eternal youth of the Greeks.  The explanation may be that they know not what to say, only that they have to say something.  There is nothing wrong with saying that paganism did not have faith, but if this is to mean anything one must be a little clearer what one means by faith, otherwise one falls back into those clichés.  It is easy to explain the whole of existence, faith included, and he is not the worst reckoner in life who counts on being admired for having such an explanation: for it is as Boileau says: ‘un sot trouve toujours un plus sot, qui l’admire’ ‘a fool can always find a greater fool who admires him’.  Faith is just this paradox, that the single individual as the particular is higher than the universal, is justified before the latter, not as subordinate but superior, though in such a way, be it noted, that it is the single individual who, having been subordinate to the universal as the particular, now by means of the universal becomes that individual who, as the particular, stands in an absolute relation to the absolute.  This position cannot be mediated, for all mediation occurs precisely by virtue of the universal; it is and remains in all eternity a paradox, inaccessible to thought.  And yet faith is this paradox.  Or else (these are implications which I would ask the reader always to bear in mind, though it would be too complicated for me to spell them out each time) - or else faith has never existed just because it has always existed.  And Abraham is done for.  That the individual can easily take this paradox for a temptation is true enough.  But one should not keep it quiet on that account.  True enough, too, that many people may have a natural aversion to the paradox, but that is no reason for making faith into something else so that they too can have it; while those who do have faith should be prepared to offer some criterion for distinguishing the paradox from a temptation.  Now the story of Abraham contains just such a teleological suspension of the ethical.  There has been no want of sharp intellects and sound scholars who have found analogies to it.  Their wisdom amounts to the splendid principle that basically everything is the same.  If one looks a little closer I doubt very much whether one will find in the whole world a single analogy, except a later one that proves nothing, for the fact remains that Abraham represents faith, and that faith finds its proper expression in him whose life is not only the most paradoxical conceivable, but so paradoxical that it simply cannot be thought.  He acts on the strength of the absurd; for it is precisely the absurd that as the single individual he is higher than the universal.  This paradox cannot be mediated; for as soon as he tries Abraham will have to admit that he is in a state of temptation, and in that case he will never sacrifice Isaac, or if he has done so he must return repentantly to the universal.  On the strength of the absurd he got Isaac back.  Abraham is therefore at no instant the tragic hero, but something quite different, either a murderer or a man of faith.  The middle-term that saves the tragic hero is something Abraham lacks.  That is why I can understand a tragic hero, but not Abraham, even though in a certain lunatic sense I admire him more than all others.  Abraham’s relation to Isaac, ethically speaking, is quite simply this, that the father should love the son more than himself.  Yet within its own compass the ethical has several rankings; let us see whether this story contains any such higher expression of the ethical which might explain his behaviour ethically, justify him ethically for suspending the ethical duty to the son, yet without thereby exceeding the ethical’s own teleology.  When an enterprise involving a whole nation is prevented, when such an enterprise is brought to a halt by heaven’s disfavour, when divine wrath sends a dead calm which mocks every effort, when the soothsayer performs his sad task and proclaims that the deity demands a young girl as a sacrifice - then it is with heroism that the father has to make that sacrifice.  Nobly will he hide his grief though he could wish he were ‘the lowly man who dares to weep’ and not the king who must bear himself as befits a king.  And however solitarily the pain enters his breast, for he has only three confidants among his people, soon the entire population will be privy to his pain, but also to his deed, to the fact that for the well-being of the whole he was willing to offer that girl, his daughter, this lovely young maiden.  Oh, what bosom! What fair cheeks! What flaxen hair! And the daughter will touch him with her tears, and the father avert his face, but the hero will raise the knife.  And when the news of this reaches the ancestral home all the beauteous maidens of Greece will blush with animation, and were the daughter a bride the betrothed would not be angered but proud to have been party to the father’s deed, because the maiden belonged to him more tenderly than to the father.  When that bold judge, who saved Israel in the hour of need binds God and himself in one breath with the same promise, then it is with heroism that he is to transform the young girl’s jubilation, the beloved daughter’s joy, to sorrow, and all Israel will grieve with her maidenly youth; but every free-born man will understand Jephthah, every stout-hearted woman admire him, and every maiden in Israel will want to do as his daughter; for what good would it be for Jephthah to triumph by making his promise but fail to keep it? Would the victory not be taken once more from the people? When a son forgets his duty, when the State entrusts the father with the sword of judgement, when the laws demand punishment at the father’s hand, then it is with heroism that the father must forget that the guilty one is his son.  Nobly will he hide his pain, but in the nation there will be not one, not even the son, who fails to admire the father, and every time the laws of Rome are interpreted it will be recalled that many interpreted them more learnedly but none more gloriously than Brutus.  On the other hand, if it had been while his fleet was being borne by wind under full sail to its destination that Agamemnon had sent that messenger who brought Iphigenia to the sacrifice; if unbound by any promise that would decide the fate of his people Jephthah had said to his daughter: ‘Sorrow now for two months henceforth over the short day of your youth, for I shall sacrifice you’; if Brutus had had a righteous son and still called upon the lictors to execute him - who would understand them? If to the question, why did you do it?, these three had replied: ‘It is a trial in which we are being tested’, would one then have understood them better? When at the decisive moment Agamemnon, Jephthah, and Brutus heroically overcome their pain, have heroically given up the loved one, and have only the outward deed to perform, then never a noble soul in the world will there be but sheds tears of sympathy for their pain, tears of admiration for their deed.  But if at that decisive moment these three men had added to the heroism with which they bore their pain the little words ‘It won’t happen’, who then would understand them? If in explanation they added: ‘We believe it on the strength of the absurd’, who then would understand them better? For who would not readily understand that it was absurd? But who would understand that for that reason one could believe it? The difference between the tragic hero and Abraham is obvious enough.  The tragic hero stays within the ethical.  He lets an expression of the ethical have its telos in a higher expression of the ethical; he reduces the ethical relation between father and son, or daughter and father, to a sentiment that has its dialectic in its relation to the idea of the ethical life.  Here, then, there can be no question of a teleological suspension of the ethical itself.  With Abraham it is different.  In his action he overstepped the ethical altogether, and had a higher telos outside it, in relation to which he suspended it.  For how could one ever bring Abraham’s action into relationship with the universal? How could any point of contact ever be discovered between what Abraham did and the universal other than that Abraham overstepped it? It is not to save a nation, not to uphold the idea of the State, that Abraham did it, not to appease angry gods.  If there was any question of the deity’s being angry, it could only have been Abraham he was angry with, and Abraham’s whole action stands in no relation to the universal, it is a purely private undertaking.  While, then, the tragic hero is great through his deed’s being an expression of the ethical life, Abraham is great through an act of purely personal virtue.  There is no higher expression of the ethical in Abraham’s life than that the father shall love the son.  The ethical in the sense of the ethical life is quite out of the question.  In so far as the universal was there at all it was latent in Isaac, concealed as it were in his loins, and it would have to cry out with Isaac’s mouth: ‘Don’t do it, you are destroying everything.’ Then why does Abraham do it? For God’s sake, and what is exactly the same, for his own.  He does it for the sake of God because God demands this proof of his faith; he does it for his own sake in order to be able to produce the proof.  The unity here is quite properly expressed in the saying in which this relationship has always been described: it is a trial, a temptation.  A temptation, but what does that mean? What we usually call a temptation is something that keeps a person from carrying out a duty, but here the temptation is the ethical itself which would keep him from doing God’s will.  But then what is the duty? For the duty is precisely the expression of God’s will.  Here we see the need for a new category for understanding Abraham.  Such a relationship to the divine is unknown to paganism.  The tragic hero enters into no private relationship with God, but the ethical is the divine and therefore the paradox in the divine can be mediated in the universal.  Abraham cannot be mediated, which can also be put by saying he cannot speak.  The moment I speak I express the universal, and when I do not no one can understand me.  So the moment Abraham wants to express himself in the universal, he has to say that his situation is one of temptation, for he has no higher expression of the universal that overrides the universal he transgresses.  Thus while Abraham arouses my admiration, he also appals me.  The person who denies himself and sacrifices himself for duty gives up the finite in order to grasp on to the infinite; he is secure enough.  The tragic hero gives up what is certain for what is still more certain, and the eye of the beholder rests confidently upon him.  But the person who gives up the universal to grasp something still higher that is not the universal, what does he do? Can this be anything but temptation? And if it were something else but the individual were mistaken, what salvation is there for him? He suffers all the pain of the tragic hero, he brings all his joy in the world to nothing, he abandons everything, and perhaps the same instant debars himself from that exalted joy so precious to him that he would buy it at any price.  That person the beholder cannot at all understand, nor let his eye rest upon him with confidence.  Perhaps what the believer intends just cannot be done, after all it is unthinkable.  Or if it could be done and the individual had misunderstood the deity, what salvation would there be for him? The tragic hero, he needs tears and he claims them; yes, where was that envious eye so barren as not to weep with Agamemnon, but where was he whose soul was so confused as to presume to weep for Abraham? The tragic hero has done with his deed at a definite moment in time, but in the course of time he achieves something no less important, he seeks out the one whose soul is beset with sorrow, whose breast cannot draw air for its stifled sighs, whose thoughts, weighed down with tears, hang heavy upon him; he appears before him, he breaks the spell of grief, loosens the corset, coaxes forth the tear by making the sufferer forget his own suffering in his.  Abraham one cannot weep over.  One approaches him with a horror religiosus holy terror like that in which Israel approached Mount Sinai.  What if the lonely man who climbs the mountain in Moriah, whose peak soars heaven-high over the plains of Aulis, is not a sleepwalker who treads surefootedly over the abyss, while someone standing at the foot of the mountain, seeing him there, trembles with anxiety and out of respect and fear dares not even shout to him - what if he should be distracted, what if he has made a mistake? - Thanks! And thanks again, to whoever holds out to one who has been assaulted and left naked by life’s sorrows, holds out to him the leaf of the word with which to hide his misery.  Thanks to you, great Shakespeare!, you who can say everything, everything, everything exactly as it is - and yet why was this torment one you never gave voice to? Was it perhaps that you kept it to yourself, like the beloved whose name one still cannot bear the world to mention? For a poet buys this power of words to utter all the grim secrets of others at the cost of a little secret he himself cannot utter, and a poet is not an apostle, he casts devils out only by the power of the devil.  But now when the ethical is thus teleologically suspended, how does the single individual in whom it is suspended exist? He exists as the particular in opposition to the universal.  Does this mean he sins? For this is the form of sin looked at ideally, just as the fact that the child does not sin because it is not conscious of its own existence as such does not mean that, looked at ideally, its existence is not that of sin or that the ethical does not make its demands of the child at every moment.  If this form cannot be said to repeat itself in a way other than that of sin, then judgement has been delivered upon Abraham.  Then how did Abraham exist? He had faith.  That is the paradox that keeps him at the extremity and which he cannot make clear to anyone else, for the paradox is that he puts himself as the single individual in an absolute relation to the absolute.  Is he justified? His justification is, once again, the paradox; for if he is the paradox it is not by virtue of being anything universal, but of being the particular.  How does the single individual assure himself that he is justified? It is a simple enough matter to level the whole of existence down to the idea of the State or to a concept of society.  If one does that one can no doubt also mediate; for in this way one does not come to the paradox at all, to the single individual’s as such being higher than the universal, which I can also put pointedly in a proposition of Pythagoras‘s, that the odd numbers are more perfect than the even.  Should one happen to catch word of an answer in the direction of the paradox in our time, it will no doubt go like this: ‘That’s to be judged by the outcome.’ A hero who has become the scandal of his generation, aware that he is a paradox that cannot be understood, cries undaunted to his contemporaries: ‘The future will show I was right!’ This cry is heard less frequently nowadays, for as our age to its detriment produces no heroes, so it has the advantage that it also produces few caricatures.  Whenever nowadays we hear the words ‘That’s to be judged by the outcome’ we know immediately with whom we have the honour of conversing.  Those who speak thus are a populous tribe which, to give them a common name, I shall call the ‘lecturers’.  They live in their thoughts, secure in life, they have a permanent position and sure prospects in a well-organized State; they are separated by centuries, even millennia, from the convulsions of existence; they have no fear that such things could happen again; what would the police and the newspapers say? Their lifework is to judge the great, to judge them according to the outcome.  Such conduct in respect of greatness betrays a strange mixture of arrogance and pitifulness, arrogance because they feel called to pass judgement, pitifulness because they feel their lives unrelated in even the remotest manner to those of the great.  Surely anyone with a speck of erectior ingenii nobility of mind cannot become so completely the cold and clammy mollusc as to lose sight altogether, in approaching the great, of the fact that ever since the Creation it has been accepted practice for the outcome to come last, and that if one is really to learn something from the great it is precisely the beginning one must attend to.  If anyone on the verge of action should judge himself according to the outcome, he would never begin.  Even though the result may gladden the whole world, that cannot help the hero; for he knows the result only when the whole thing is over, and that is not how he becomes a hero, but by virtue of the fact that he began.  But in any case the outcome in its dialectic (in so far as it is finitude’s answer to the infinite question) is totally incompatible with the existence of the hero.  Or are we to take it that Abraham was justified in relating himself as the single individual to the universal by the fact that he got Isaac by a marvel? Had Abraham actually sacrificed Isaac, would that have meant he was less justified? But it is the outcome that arouses our curiosity, as with the conclusion of a book; one wants nothing of the fear, the distress, the paradox.  One flirts with the outcome aesthetically; it comes as unexpectedly and yet as effortlessly as a prize in the lottery; and having heard the outcome one is improved.  And yet no robber of temples hard-labouring in chains is so base a criminal as he who plunders the holy in this way, and not even Judas, who sold his master for thirty pieces of silver, is more contemptible than the person who would thus offer greatness for sale.  It goes against my nature to speak inhumanly of greatness, to let its grandeur fade into an indistinct outline at an immense distance, or represent it as great without the human element in it coming to the fore - whence it ceases to be the great; for it is not what happens to me that makes me great, but what I do, and there is surely no one who thinks that anyone became great by winning the big lottery prize.  Even of a person born in humble circumstances I ask that he should not be so inhuman towards himself as to be unable to think of the king’s castle except at a distance and by dreaming of its grandeur indistinctly, wanting to exalt it and simultaneously destroying its grandeur by exalting it in such a debasing way.  I ask that he be human enough to approach and bear himself with confidence and dignity there too.  He should not be so inhuman as shamelessly to want to violate every rule of respect by storming into the king’s salon straight from the street - he loses more by doing that than the king; on the contrary he should find pleasure in observing every rule of decorum with a glad and confident enthusiasm, which is just what will make him frank and open-hearted.  This is only an analogy, for the difference here is only a very imperfect expression of the spiritual distance.  I ask everyone not to think so inhumanly of himself as to dare not set foot in those palaces where not just the memory of the chosen lives on but the chosen themselves.  He should not push himself shamelessly forward and thrust upon them his kinship with them, he should feel happy every time he bows before them, but be frank and confident and always something more than a cleaning woman; for unless he wants to be more than that he will never come in there.  And what will help him are exactly the fear and distress in which the great are tried, for otherwise, at least if there is a drop of red blood in him, they will merely arouse his righteous envy.  And whatever can only be great at a distance, whatever people want to exalt with empty and hollow phrases, that they themselves reduce to nothing.  Was there ever in the world anyone as great as that blessed woman, the mother of God, the Virgin Mary? And yet how do people speak of her? To say she was favoured among women doesn’t make her great, and if it were not for the odd fact that those who listen can think as inhumanly as those who speak, surely every young girl would ask, why am I not favoured too? And had I nothing more to say I should by no means dismiss such a question as stupid; for as regards favours, abstractly considered, everyone is equally entitled.  What is left out is the distress, the fear, the paradox.  My thought is as pure as the next man’s and surely the thought of anyone able to think in this way will be pure; if not, something dreadful is in store; for a person who has once called these images to mind cannot be rid of them again, and if he sins against them, then in their quiet wrath, more terrifying than the clamour of ten voracious critics, they will wreak their awful vengeance on him.  No doubt Mary bore the child miraculously, but it went with Mary ‘after the manner of women’, and such a time is one of fear, distress, and paradox.  No doubt the angel was a ministering spirit, but he was not an obliging one who went round to all the other young girls in Israel and said: ‘Do not despise Mary, something out of the ordinary is happening to her.’ The angel came only to Mary, and no one could understand her.  Yet what woman was done greater indignity than Mary, and isn’t it true here too that those whom God blesses he damns in the same breath? This is the spirit’s understanding of Mary, and she is not at all - as it offends me to say, though even more so that people have mindlessly and irresponsibly thought of her thus - she is not at all the fine lady sitting in her finery and playing with a divine child.  Yet for saying notwithstanding, ‘Behold the handmaid of the Lord’, she is great, and it seems to me that it should not be difficult to explain why she became the mother of God.  She needs no worldly admiration, as little as Abraham needs our tears, for she was no heroine and he no hero, but both of them became greater than that, not by any means by being relieved of the distress, the agony, and the paradox, but because of these.  Great indeed it is when the poet presents his tragic hero for popular admiration and dares to say: ‘Weep for him, for he deserves it’; for there is greatness in meriting the tears of those who deserve to shed them; great indeed for the poet to dare hold the crowd in check, dare discipline people into testing their own worthiness to weep for the hero, for the waste-water of snivellers is a degradation of the holy.  But greater than all these is that the knight of faith dares to say even to the noble person who would weep for him: ‘Do not weep for me, but weep for yourself.’ One is stirred, one harks back to those beautiful times, sweet tender longings lead one to the goal of one’s desire, to see Christ walking about in the promised land.  One forgets the fear, the distress, the paradox.  Was it so easy a matter not to be mistaken? Was it not a fearful thought that this man who walked among the others was God? Was it not terrifying to sit down to eat with him? Was it so easy a matter to become an apostle? But the outcome, eighteen centuries, that helps; it helps that shabby deception wherein one deceives oneself and others.  I do not feel brave enough to wish to be contemporary with such events, but for that reason I do not judge harshly of those who were mistaken, nor think meanly of those who saw the truth.  But now I return to Abraham.  In the time before the outcome either Abraham was a murderer every minute or we stay with the paradox which is higher than all mediation.  So Abraham’s story contains a teleological suspension of the ethical.  He has, as the single individual, become higher than the universal.  This is the paradox which cannot be mediated.  How he got into it is just as inexplicable as how he stayed in it.  If this is not how it is with Abraham, then he is not even a tragic hero but a murderer.  To want to go on calling him the father of faith, to talk of this to those who are only concerned with words, is thoughtless.  A tragic hero can become a human being by his own strength, but not the knight of faith.  When a person sets out on the tragic hero’s admittedly hard path there are many who could lend him advice; but he who walks the narrow path of faith no one can advise, no one understand.  Faith is a marvel, and yet no human being is excluded from it; for that in which all human life is united is passion, 4 and faith is a passion.  Fear and Trembling Table of Contents Title Page Copyright Page Preface Attunement Speech in Praise of Abraham Problemata Preamble from the Heart Problema I Problema II Problema III Epilogue FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE Fear and Trembling Problema II Is There an Absolute Duty to God? The ethical is the universal and as such, in turn, the divine.  It is therefore correct to say that all duty is ultimately duty to God; but if one cannot say more one says in effect that really I have no duty to God.  The duty becomes duty to God by being referred to God, but I do not enter into relation with God in the duty itself.  Thus it is a duty to love one’s neighbour; it is a duty in so far as it is referred to God; yet it is not God that I come in relation to in the duty but the neighbour I love.  If, in this connection, I then say that it is my duty to love God, I in fact only utter a tautology, in so far as ‘God’ is understood in an altogether abstract sense as the divine: i.e.  the universal, i.e.  duty.  The whole of human existence is in that case entirely self-enclosed, as a sphere, and the ethical is at once the limit and completion.  God becomes an invisible, vanishing point, an impotent thought, and his power is to be found only in the ethical, which fills all existence.  So if it should occur to someone to want to love God in some other sense than that mentioned, he is merely being extravagant and loves a phantom which, if it only had the strength to speak, would say to him: ‘Stay where you belong, I don’t ask for your love.’ If it should occur to someone to want to love God in another way, this love would be suspect, like the love referred to by Rousseau when he talks of a person’s loving the Kaffirs instead of his neighbour.  Now if all this is correct, if there is nothing incommensurable in a human life, but any incommensurability were due only to some chance from which nothing followed so far as existence is looked at in light of the Idea, then Hegel would be right.  But where he is wrong is in talking about faith or in letting Abraham be looked on as its father; for in this latter he has passed sentence both on Abraham and on faith.  In the Hegelian philosophy das Äussere (die Entäusserung) the outer, the externalization is higher than das Innere the inner.  This is often illustrated by an example.  The child is das Innere, the man das Äussere; which is why the child is determined precisely by the outer, and conversely the man as das Äussere by the inner.  Faith, on the contrary, is this paradox, that interiority is higher than exteriority, or to recall again an expression we used above, that the odd number is higher than the even.  In the ethical view of life, then, it is the individual’s task to divest himself of the determinant of interiority and give it an expression in the exterior.  Whenever the individual shrinks from doing so, whenever he wants to stay inside, or slip back into, the inner determinant of feeling, mood, etc., he commits an offence, he is in a state of temptation.  The paradox of faith is this, that there is an interiority that is incommensurable with the exterior, an interiority which, it should be stressed, is not identical with the first that of the child, but is a new interiority.  This must not be overlooked.  Recent philosophy has allowed itself without further ado to substitute the immediate for ‘faith’.  If one does that it is ridiculous to deny that faith has existed through all ages.  Faith in such a case keeps fairly ordinary company, it belongs with feeling, mood, idiosyncrasy, hysteria and the rest.  So far philosophy is right to say one should not stop at that.  But there is nothing to warrant philosophy’s speaking in this manner.  Prior to faith there is a movement of infinity, and only then enters faith, nec opinate unexpectedly, on the strength of the absurd.  This I am very well able to understand, without claiming thereby to have faith.  If faith is no more than what philosophy passes it off as then Socrates himself already went further, much further, rather than the converse, that he didn’t come that far.  He made the movement of infinity intellectually.  His ignorance is the infinite resignation.  That task is in itself a match for human strength, even if people nowadays scorn it; yet it is only when this has been done, only when the individual has exhausted himself in the infinite, that he reaches the point where faith can emerge.  Then faith’s paradox is this, that the single individual is higher than the universal, that the single individual (to recall a theological distinction less in vogue these days) determines his relation to the universal through his relation to the absolute, not his relation to the absolute through his relation to the universal.  The paradox can also be put by saying that there is an absolute duty to God; for in this tie of obligation the individual relates himself absolutely, as the single individual, to the absolute.  When people now say that it is a duty to love God, it is in a sense quite different from the above; for if this duty is absolute the ethical is reduced to the relative.  It doesn’t follow, nevertheless, that the ethical is to be done away with.  Only that it gets a quite different expression, the paradoxical expression, so that, e.g., love of God can cause the knight of faith to give his love of his neighbour the opposite expression to that which is his duty ethically speaking.  Unless this is how it is, faith has no place in existence; and faith is then a temptation, and Abraham is done for, since he gave in to it.  This paradox does not allow of mediation: for it rests precisely on the single individual’s being only the single individual.  As soon as this individual wants to express his absolute duty in the universal, becomes conscious of it in the latter, he knows he is in a state of temptation, and then, even if he otherwise resists the temptation, he does not come to fulfil that so-called absolute duty, and if he does not resist it he sins even if realiter independently of his inclination, wishes, state of mind his act is the one that was his absolute duty.  Thus what could Abraham have done? If he had wanted to say to someone: ‘I love Isaac more than everything in the world, and that’s why it is so hard for me to sacrifice him’, the person would surely have shaken his head and said: ‘Then why sacrifice him?’, or if he was a perceptive fellow perhaps he might even have seen through Abraham, realized that he was betraying feelings which stood in flagrant contradiction with his deed.  In the story of Abraham we find just such a paradox.  Ethically speaking his relation to Isaac is this, that the father is to love the son.  This ethical relationship is reduced to the relative as against the absolute relation to God.  To the question, why?, Abraham has no other answer than that it is a trial and a temptation, which, as remarked above, is what makes it a unity of being for both God’s sake and his own.  These two are also correlative in ordinary usage.  Thus when we see someone do something that doesn’t conform with the universal, we say, ‘He can hardly be doing that for the sake of God’, meaning by this that he did it for his own sake.  The paradox of faith has lost the intermediate term, i.e.  the universal.  On the one hand it contains the expression of extreme egoism (doing this dreadful deed for his own sake) and on the other the expression of the most absolute devotion (doing it for God’s sake).  Faith itself cannot be mediated into the universal, for in that case it would be cancelled.  Faith is this paradox, and the single individual is quite unable to make himself intelligible to anyone.  One might suppose the single individual could make himself understood to another individual who is in the same situation.  Such a view would be unthinkable were it not that nowadays people try in so many ways to sneak their way into greatness.  The one knight of faith simply cannot help the other.  Either the single individual becomes a knight of faith himself by putting on the paradox, or he never becomes one.  Partnership in these regions is quite unthinkable.  If there is any more precise explanation of the idea behind the sacrifice of Isaac, it is one that the individual can only give to himself.  And supposing one could settle, even with some exactitude, in universal terms, how to understand the case of Isaac (which would in any case be the most absurd self-contradiction, namely that the single individual who stands precisely outside the universal be brought in under universal categories, when he is expressly to act as the single individual outside the universal), the individual could still never be assured of the truth of this explanation by others, but only by himself as the single individual.  So even if someone were so cowardly and base as to want to be a knight of faith on someone else’s responsibility, he would never become one; for only the single individual becomes one, as the single individual, and this is the knight’s greatness, as I can well understand without being party to it, since I lack courage; though also his terror, as I can understand even better.  As everyone knows, Luke 14.26 presents a remarkable teaching on the absolute duty to God: ‘If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.’ This is a hard saying, who can bear to hear it? And for that reason it is heard very seldom.  Yet this silence is only a futile evasion.  The student of theology learns, however, that these words occur in the New Testament, and in one or another exegetical aid he finds the information that misein to hate, both here and in some other passages, is used per meiosin by adopting a weaker sense to mean: minus diligo love less, posthabeo give less priority to, non colo show no respect to, nihil facio make nothing of.  The context in which these words occur seems, however, not to corroborate this tasteful explanation.  For in the next verse but one there is a story about someone who plans to erect a tower but first makes some estimate of his capacity to do so, lest he be the object of ridicule later.  The close link between this story and the verse quoted seems to suggest precisely that the words are to be taken in as terrifying a sense as possible in order that everyone should examine his own ability to erect the building.  If this pious and tender-minded exegete, who thinks he can smuggle Christianity into the world by haggling in this way, should succeed in convincing anyone that grammatically, linguistically, and kata analogian by analogy this was the meaning of the passage, then it is to be hoped that in so doing he also manages to convince the same person that Christianity is one of the most miserable things in the world.  For the teaching which in one of its most lyrical outpourings, where the sense of its eternal validity swells up most strongly, has nothing to offer but a sounding phrase that signifies nothing and suggests only that one is to be less kind, less attentive, more indifferent; the teaching which, just as it seems to want to tell us something terrible, ends up in drivel rather than terror — that teaching is certainly not worth standing up for.  The words are terrible, but I feel sure they can be understood without the person who understands them necessarily having the courage to do as they say.  And yet there must be honesty enough to admit what is there, to confess to its greatness even if one lacks the courage oneself.  Anyone who manages that will not exclude himself from a share in the beautiful story, for in a way it contains a kind of comfort for the man who lacks courage to begin building the tower.  But he must be honest and not pass off this lack of courage as humility, since on the contrary it is pride, while the courage of faith is the only humble courage.  One now sees readily that if the passage is to have any sense, it must be understood literally.  It is God who demands absolute love.  Anyone who, in demanding a person’s love, thinks this must be proved by the latter’s becoming lukewarm towards all that was hitherto dear to him, is not simply an egoist but a fool, and anyone demanding such a love would simultaneously sign his own death-warrant in so far as his life is bound up in this love he craves.  A husband requires his wife to leave her father and mother, but were he to regard it as proof of her special love for him that for his sake she became a lukewarm, indolent daughter, etc., then he would be an idiot among idiots.  Had he any notion of what love was, he would want to discover — and should he discover it see in this an assurance that his wife loved him more than any other in the kingdom — that she was perfect in her love as daughter and sister.  So what would be considered a sign of egoism and stupidity in a person, one is supposed with the help of an exegete to regard as a worthy conception of the deity.  But how then hate them? I shall not take up the human love/hate distinction here, not because I have so much against it, since at least it is a passionate distinction, but it is egoistic and so does not fit here.  If I regard the requirement as a paradox, on the other hand, then I understand it, i.e.  understand it in the way one can understand a paradox.  The absolute duty can then lead to what ethics would forbid, but it can by no means make the knight of faith have done with loving.  This is shown by Abraham.  The moment he is ready to sacrifice Isaac, the ethical expression for what he does is this: he hates Isaac.  But if he actually hates Isaac he can be certain that God does not require this of him; for Cain and Abraham are not the same.  Isaac he must love with all his soul.  When God asks for Isaac, Abraham must if possible love him even more, and only then can he sacrifice him; for it is indeed this love of Isaac that in its paradoxical opposition to his love of God makes his act a sacrifice.  But the distress and anguish in the paradox is that, humanly speaking, he is quite incapable of making himself understood.  Only in the moment when his act is in absolute contradiction with his feeling, only then does he sacrifice Isaac, but the reality of his act is that in virtue of which he belongs to the universal, and there he is and remains a murderer.  Furthermore, the passage in Luke must be understood in such a way that one grasps that the knight of faith has no higher expression whatever of the universal (as the ethical) which can save him.  Thus if we imagine the Church were to demand this sacrifice of one of its members, then all we have is a tragic hero.  For qualitatively the idea of the Church is no different from that of the State, inasmuch as the individual can enter it by common mediation, and in so far as the individual has entered the paradox he does not arrive at the idea of the Church; he doesn’t get out of the paradox either, but must find either his blessedness or his damnation inside it.  An ecclesiastical hero expresses the universal in his deed, and no one in the Church, not even his father or mother, etc., will fail to understand him.  But he is not the knight of faith, and has also a different answer from Abraham’s; he doesn’t say it is a trial or a temptation in which he is being tested.  One as a rule refrains from citing texts like the one in Luke.  There is a fear of letting people loose, a fear that the worst will happen once the individual enjoys carrying on like an individual.  Moreover living as the individual is thought to be the easiest thing of all, and it is the universal that people must be coerced into becoming.  I can share neither this fear nor this opinion, and for the same reason.  No person who has learned that to exist as the individual is the most terrifying thing of all will be afraid of saying it is the greatest.  But then he mustn’t say it in a way that makes his words a pitfall for somebody on the loose, but rather in a way that helps that person into the universal, even though his words can make some small allowance for greatness.  The person who dares not mention such passages dares not mention Abraham either, and to think that existing as the individual is an easy enough matter implies a very dubious indirect admission with regard to oneself; for someone who really respects himself and is concerned for his own soul is assured of the fact that a person living under his own supervision in the world at large lives in greater austerity and seclusion than a maiden in her lady’s bower.  That there may be some who need coercion, who if given free rein would riot in selfish pleasure like unbridled beasts, is no doubt true, but one should show precisely by the fact that one knows how to speak with fear and trembling that one is not of their number.  And out of respect for greatness one should indeed speak, lest it be forgotten for fear of the harm which surely won’t arise if one speaks as one who knows it is the great, knows its terrors, and if one doesn’t know these one doesn’t know its greatness either.  Let us then consider more closely the distress and fear in the paradox of faith.  The tragic hero renounces himself in order to express the universal; the knight of faith renounces the universal in order to be the particular.  As mentioned, it all depends on how one is placed.  Someone who believes it is a simple enough matter to be the individual can always be certain that he is not the knight of faith; for stragglers and vagrant geniuses are not men of faith.  Faith’s knight knows on the contrary that it is glorious to belong to the universal.  He knows it is beautiful and benign to be the particular who translates himself into the universal, the one who so to speak makes a clear and elegant edition of himself, as immaculate as possible, and readable for all; he knows it is refreshing to become intelligible to oneself in the universal, so that he understands the universal and everyone who understands him understands the universal through him in turn, and both rejoice in the security of the universal.  He knows it is beautiful to be born as the particular with the universal as his home, his friendly abode, which receives him straightaway with open arms when he wishes to stay there.  But he also knows that higher up there winds a lonely path, narrow and steep; he knows it is terrible to be born in solitude outside the universal, to walk without meeting a single traveller.  He knows very well where he is, and how he is related to men.  Humanly speaking he is insane and cannot make himself understood to anyone.  And yet ‘insane’ is the mildest expression for him.  If he isn’t viewed thus, he is a hypocrite and the higher up the path he climbs, the more dreadful a hypocrite he becomes.  The knight of faith knows it gives inspiration to surrender oneself to the universal, that it takes courage to do so, but also that there is a certain security in it, just because it is for the universal; he knows it is glorious to be understood by every noble mind, and in such a way that even the beholder is thereby ennobled.  This he knows and he feels as though bound, he could wish this was the task he had been set.  Thus surely Abraham must have now and then wished that the task was to love Isaac in a way meet and fitting for a father, as all would understand and as would be remembered for all time; he must have wished his task was to sacrifice Isaac for the universal, so as to inspire fathers to illustrious deeds - and he must have been well nigh horrified by the thought that for him such wishes were merely temptations and must be treated as such; for he knew it was a solitary path he trod, and that he was doing nothing for the universal but only being tested and tried himself.  Or what was it Abraham did for the universal? Let me speak humanly about it, really humanly! It takes him seventy years to get the son of his old age.  What others get soon enough and have long joy of takes him seventy years.  And why? Because he is being tested and tried.  Is that not insanity? But Abraham believed, and only Sarah wavered and got him to take Hagar as his concubine — but for that reason he also had to drive Hagar away.  He gets Isaac and now he is to be tried once again.  He knew it was glorious to express the universal, glorious to live with Isaac.  But this is not the task.  He knew it would have been a kingly deed to sacrifice such a son for the universal, he himself would have found repose in that, and everyone would have ‘reposed’ in their praise of his deed, just as the vowel ‘reposes’ in its quiescent letter; but this is not the task — he is being tried.  That Roman general famous under the name of Cunctator halted the enemy by his delaying tactics, yet what kind of delayer is Abraham by comparison? But he isn’t saving the State.  This is the sum of one hundred and thirty years.  Who can bear it? Should his contemporaries — if they can be called that — not say: ‘There is an eternal procrastinating with Abraham; when he finally gets a son — and that took long enough — he wants to sacrifice him; he must be demented; and if only he could explain why he wanted to do that, but no, it’s always a “trial” ’? Nor could Abraham offer any further explanation, for his life is like a book put under divine seizure and which will never become publici juris public property.  This is what is terrible.  Anyone who doesn’t see this can always be quite certain he is no knight of faith; but anyone who does see it will not deny that the step of even the most tried tragic hero goes like a dance compared with the slow and creeping progress of the knight of faith.  And having seen it and realized he does not have the courage to understand it, he must at least have some idea of the wonderful glory achieved by that knight in becoming God’s confidant, the Lord’s friend, and — to speak really humanly — in addressing God in heaven as ‘Thou’, while even the tragic hero only addresses him in the third person.  The tragic hero is soon finished, his struggle is soon at an end; he makes the infinite movement and is now safe in the universal.  But the knight of faith is kept awake, for he is under constant trial and can turn back in repentance to the universal at any moment, and this possibility can just as well be a temptation as the truth.  Enlightenment as to which is something he can get from no one; otherwise he would be outside the paradox.  The knight of faith has therefore, first and foremost, the passion to concentrate the whole of the ethical that he violates in one single thing; he can be sure that he really loves Isaac with all his soul.  5 If he cannot be that, he is in a state of temptation.  Next, he has the passion to evoke this certainty intact in a twinkling and in as fully valid a way as in the first instance.  If he cannot do this he doesn’t get started, for then he must constantly start again from the beginning.  The tragic hero, too, concentrates in one single thing the ethical that he teleologically violates, but in this thing he has resort to the universal.  The knight of faith has only himself, and it is there the terrible lies.  Most people let their ethical obligations last a day at a time, but then they never reach this passionate concentration, this energetic awareness.  The tragic hero can in a sense be helped by the universal in acquiring these, but the knight of faith is alone about everything.  The tragic hero acts and finds his point of rest in the universal, the knight of faith is kept in constant tension.  Agamemnon gives up his claim to Iphigenia, thereby finds his point of rest in the universal, and now proceeds to give her in sacrifice.  If Agamemnon had not made the movement, if in the decisive moment, instead of a passionate concentration, his soul had been lost in common chatter about his having several daughters, and vielleicht das Ausserordentliche perhaps something extraordinary could happen - then naturally he would not be a hero but a case for charity.  Abraham has the hero’s concentration too, even though in him it is much more difficult since he has no resort at all to the universal, but he makes one movement more through which he concentrates his soul back upon the marvel.  If Abraham hadn’t done that he would only have been an Agamemnon, provided it can be explained how his willingness to sacrifice Isaac can be justified other than by its benefiting the universal.  Whether the individual is now really in a state of temptation or a knight of faith, only the individual can decide.  Still, it is possible on the basis of the paradox to construct certain criteria which even someone not in it can understand.  The true knight of faith is always absolute isolation, the false knight is sectarian.  The latter involves an attempt to leap off the narrow path of the paradox in order to become a tragic hero on the cheap.  The tragic hero expresses the universal and sacrifices himself for it.  The sectarian Master Jackel has instead his private theatre, i.e. several good friends and companions who represent the universal about as well as the public witnesses in The Golden Snuffbox represent justice.  The knight of faith, on the other hand, is the paradox, he is the individual, absolutely nothing but the individual, without connections and complications.  This is the terror that the puny sectarian cannot endure.  Instead of learning from this that he is incapable of greatness and plainly admitting it, something I cannot but approve since it is what I myself do, the poor wretch thinks he will achieve it by joining company with other poor wretches.  But it won’t at all work, no cheating is tolerated in the world of spirit.  A dozen sectarians link arms, they know nothing at all of the lonely temptations in store for the knight of faith and which he dare not shun just because it would be more terrible still were he presumptuously to force his way forward.  The sectarians deafen each other with their clang and clatter, hold dread at bay with their shrieks, and a whooping Sunday-outing like this thinks it is storming heaven, believes it is following the same path as the knight of faith who, in cosmic isolation, hears never a voice but walks alone with his dreadful responsibility.  As for the knight of faith, he is assigned to himself alone, he has the pain of being unable to make himself intelligible to others but feels no vain desire to show others the way.  The pain is the assurance, vain desires are unknown to him, his mind is too serious for that.  The false knight readily betrays himself by this instantly acquired proficiency; he just doesn’t grasp the point that if another individual is to walk the same path he has to be just as much the individual and is therefore in no need of guidance, least of all from one anxious to press his services on others.  Here again, people unable to bear the martyrdom of unintelligibility jump off the path, and choose instead, conveniently enough, the world’s admiration of their proficiency.  The true knight of faith is a witness, never a teacher, and in this lies the deep humanity in him which is more worth than this foolish concern for others’ weal and woe which is honoured under the name of sympathy, but which is really nothing but vanity.  A person who wants only to be a witness confesses thereby that no one, not even the least, needs another person’s sympathy, or is to be put down so another can raise himself up.  But because what he himself won he did not win on the cheap, so neither does he sell it on the cheap; he is not so pitiable as to accept people’s admiration and pay for it with silent contempt; he knows that whatever truly is great is available equally for all.  So either there is an absolute duty to God, and if so then it is the paradox described, that the single individual as the particular is higher than the universal and as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute - or else faith has never existed because it has existed always; or else Abraham is done for; or else one must explain the passage in Luke 14 in the way that tasteful exegete did, and explain the corresponding passages likewise, and similar ones.  Fear and Trembling Fear and Trembling PENGUIN BOOKS Published by the Penguin Group Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.  Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0745, Auckland, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England This edition published in Penguin Books (UK) 2005 Published in Penguin Books (USA) 2006 Translation copyright © Alastair Hannay, 1985 All rights reserved Reprinted from Fear and Trembling, translated and introduced by Alastair Hannay (Penguin Classics, 1985).  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Kierkegaard, Søren, 1813-1855.  Frygt og bæven.  English Fear and trembling / Søren Kierkegaard; translated by Alastair Hannay.  p.  cm.  — (Penguin great ideas) eISBN : 978-1-101-00714-3 1.  Christianity — Philosophy.  I.  Hannay, Alastair.  II.  Title.  III.  Series.  BR100.K52 2006 498’.9 — dc22 2006043992 Set in Monotype Dante The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.  Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials.  Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.  http://us.penguingroup.com Fear and Trembling 1 In olden days people said, ‘What a shame things in the world don’t go in the way the priest preaches.’ But the time may be coming, not least with the help of philosophy, when we shall be able to say, ‘How fortunate that things in the world don’t go in the way the priest preaches, since at least there’s a little meaning to life, but none in his sermon.’ 2 Of course any other interest whatever in which an individual concentrates the whole of life’s reality can, when it proves unrealizable, give rise to the movement of resignation.  But I have chosen falling in love to illustrate the movements because this interest will no doubt be more readily understood and thus it relieves me of the need to make all the introductory comments which would be of direct interest to only a few.  3 This requires passion.  Every movement of infinity occurs with passion, and no reflection can bring about a movement.  That’s the perpetual leap in life which explains the movement, while mediation is a chimera which in Hegel is supposed to explain everything and besides is the only thing he has never tried to explain.  Passion is needed even to make the familiar Socratic distinction between what one does and what one doesn’t understand; naturally even more so in making the genuinely Socratic movement, that of ignorance.  What we lack today is not reflection but passion.  For that reason our age is really in a sense too tenacious of life to die, for dying is one of the most remarkable leaps, and a small verse has always greatly attracted me, because having wished himself all the good and simple things in life in five or six lines previously, the poet ends thus: ‘ein seliger Sprung in die Ewigkeit’ a blessed leap into eternity.  4 Lessing has somewhere made similar remarks from a purely aesthetic point of view.  In the passage in question he actually wants to show that sorrow too can express itself with wit.  To that end he quotes the words spoken on a particular occasion by the unfortunate English king, Edward II.  As contrast he quotes from Diderot: a story of a farmer’s wife and a remark of hers, and then continues: ‘That too was wit, and the wit of a peasant at that: but the situation made it inevitable.  Consequently one mustn’t try to find the excuse for the witty expression of pain and of sorrow in the fact that the person who uttered them was superior, well-educated, intelligent, and witty as well, for the passions make all men again equal ...  the explanation lies in the fact that in the same situation probably everyone would have said the same thing.  The peasant woman’s thought is one a queen might just as well have had, just as what the king said on that occasion could, and no doubt would, have been said by a peasant.’ 5 I will explain once more the difference in the collision as between the tragic hero and the knight of faith.  The tragic hero assures himself that the ethical obligation to his son, daughter, etc. is totally present in him by virtue of the fact that he transforms it into a wish.  Thus Agamemnon can say: this is my proof that I am not violating my paternal obligation, that my duty to Iphigenia is my only wish.  Here, then, wish and duty match one another.  Happy my lot in life if my wish coincides with my duty, and conversely; and most people’s task in life is exactly to stay under their obligation, and by their enthusiasm to transform it into their wish.  The tragic hero renounces what he wishes in order to accomplish his duty.  For the knight of faith, wish and duty are also identical, but the knight of faith is required to give up both.  So when renouncing in resignation what he wishes he finds no repose; for it is after all his duty that he is giving up.  If he stays under his obligation and keeps his wish he will not become the knight of faith; for the absolute duty requires precisely that he give up the duty that is identical with the wish.  The tragic hero acquires a higher expression of duty, but not an absolute duty.  6 These movements and attitudes could also be handled aesthetically.  But I leave it open how far faith and the life of belief in general can be handled in that way.  I will only - since I always like to thank those to whom I owe something - express my gratitude to Lessing for the few hints of a Christian drama to be found in his Hamburgische Dramaturgie.  But he has focused on the purely divine side of that life (the consummated victory), and has therefore despaired.  Perhaps if he had paid more attention to the human side he would have come to a different conclusion.  ( Theologia viatorum wayfarer’s theology.) What he says is undeniably very brief, partly evasive, but as I am always very glad of the chance of Lessing’s company I seize on it immediately.  Lessing was not just one of the most erudite minds Germany has produced; he was not just unusually exact in his learning, so that one can safely rely on him and his autopsy without fear of being tricked by inaccurate and concocted quotations, half-understood phrases taken from unreliable compendia, or of being put off-balance by a foolish advertising of novelties that the ancients have stated far better; he had in addition a most unusual gift for explaining what he himself had understood.  There he stopped.  Nowadays one goes further and explains more than one has understood.  7 According to Aristotle the course of the catastrophe is as follows.  In order to avenge itself, the bride’s family plants a vase from the temple among the bridegroom’s household belongings and he is condemned as a temple-robber.  But this is immaterial, for the question is not whether the family is clever or stupid in the manner of its taking revenge; the family is of only theoretical interest in as much as it impinges on the dialectic of the hero.  Besides, there is fatefulness enough in the fact that, though intending to avoid the danger by not marrying, he plunges right into it, together with the fact that his life comes into twofold contact with the divine, first in the utterance of the augur and second by his being condemned as a temple-robber.  8 Here one might trace the dialectic movements in a different direction.  Heaven predicts a personal misfortune due to the marriage, so he could just as well give up the marriage yet needn’t give up the girl on that account, but live in a romantic relationship with her which was more than satisfactory for the lovers.  This, however, amounts to insulting the girl, for in his love for her he doesn’t express the universal, and it was the task both of the poet and of the ethicist to defend marriage.  On the whole, were poetry to attend to the religious aspect and to the inner feeling of its characters, it would command themes of much greater importance than those it now occupies itself with.  Here is the story poetry is repeatedly giving us: a man is stuck with a girl he once loved, or maybe never really loved because he has now seen another who is the ideal.  A man makes mistakes in life, it was the right street but the wrong house, for on the second floor just over the way lives the ideal — that’s what people consider the proper subject of poetry.  A lover makes a mistake, he saw his loved one by candlelight and thought she had dark hair, but look!, on closer inspection she was blonde - however, the sister, there’s the ideal.  That’s what people think poetry is about.  In my view any such man is an impudent fool who can be unbearable enough in life but should be instantly booed off the stage when he tries to put on airs in poetry.  Only the clash of passion against passion provides a poetic collision, not this rummaging about in the particulars of the same passion.  In the Middle Ages, for example, when a girl has fallen in love and then been convinced that earthly love is a sin and prefers a heavenly love, here we have a poetic collision; and the girl too is poetic, for her life is in the idea.  9 There is still another way of treating this legend.  The merman does not want to seduce Agnete, even though he has seduced many previously.  He is no longer a merman, or is if you will a pitiable merman who has now already for some time been sitting sorrowfully on the sea-bed.  However, he knows (as indeed the legend has it) that he can be saved by an innocent girl’s love.  But he has a bad conscience about girls and dare not approach them.  Then he sees Agnete.  Already, many times, as he lay hidden in the reeds, he has seen her walking along the shore.  Her beauty, her quiet self-possession captivate him; but his soul is filled with sadness, no wild desire rages there.  And when the merman blends his sigh with the whispering of the reeds she turns her ear towards it.  Then she stands still and falls into reverie, more delectable than any woman and yet beautiful as an angel of deliverance, who inspired the merman with confidence.  The merman plucks up courage, he approaches Agnete, he wins her love, he hopes for his deliverance.  But Agnete was no quiet girl, she was in fact very taken with the roaring of the ocean and what pleased her about the sad sighing by the sea was that it made the roar in her breast grow stronger.  She would be off and away, rush wildly out into the infinite with the merman, whom she loves - so she eggs the merman on.  She scorned his humility and now the pride reawakens.  10 Aesthetics sometimes treats a similar theme with its usual captiousness.  The merman is saved through Agnete and all ends in a happy marriage.  A happy marriage! Very handy, to be sure.  On the other hand if ethics is to give the wedding speech I imagine things would go differently.  Aesthetics throws the cloak of love over the merman and so everything is forgotten.  It is also rash enough to suppose that things happen at a wedding as they do at an auction, where everything is sold in the condition it is in when it comes under the hammer.  All it cares for is that the lovers get one another, the rest is of no concern.  If only it could see what happens afterwards! But it hasn’t time for that, straightaway it is in full swing again snapping together another couple.  Aesthetics is the most faithless of all sciences.  Anyone who has truly loved it will in a way become unhappy; while anyone who has never done so is and will remain a pecus ox, or blockhead.  11 Up to this point I have carefully avoided all consideration of the question of sin and its reality.  Everything has been centred on Abraham, and he can still be reached with the categories of immediacy, at least so far as I can understand him.  But once sin makes its appearance ethics comes to grief precisely on the question of repentance.  Repentance is the highest ethical expression but for that very reason the most profound ethical self-contradiction.  12 This is not credited in our serious age, and yet remarkably enough even in the typically flightier and less consistently reflective age of paganism the two representatives of the Greek gnothi sauton know thyself way of thought have, each in his own manner, intimated that if one probes one’s own depths what one uncovers is first and foremost the disposition to evil.  I need hardly remark that I am thinking of Pythagoras and Socrates.  13 If one would rather not use a doubter, a similar figure would do.  An ironist, for example, whose sharp eye has taken radical measure of the ludicrousness of life, who through a secret understanding with the forces of life ascertains what the patient needs.  He knows he commands the power of laughter; should he wish to wield it he would be sure of victory and, what is even better, of his happiness.  He knows some voice is going to raise itself against him, but also that he himself is the stronger; he knows people can still be brought for a moment to appear serious - but also that, privately, they long to laugh with him; he knows that it is still possible to bring a woman for a moment to hold up her fan before her eyes when she speaks, but he also knows that behind the fan she is laughing, he knows the fan is not completely opaque, he knows one can make invisible inscriptions on it, he knows that when a woman strikes at him with the fan it is because she has understood him, he knows infallibly how laughter creeps into a person and dwells there secretly, and how once lodged there it lies in ambush and waits.  Let us suppose such an Aristophanes, such a Voltaire, slightly altered, for he is also of a sympathetic nature, he loves life, loves people, and knows that even if a young, saved generation might benefit from the rebuke of laughter, in his own age for many it would mean rack and ruin.  So he keeps silent and as far as possible forgets to laugh himself.  But does he dare keep silent? Perhaps many will fail to see the difficulty I am referring to.  They will probably consider it admirably high-minded of him to keep silent.  That is not at all what I think.  I believe that if any such person has not the magnanimity to keep silent he is a traitor to life.  So I require this magnanimity of him.  But if he has it he dares to keep silent.  Ethics is a dangerous science and it may well have been out of purely ethical considerations that Aristophanes decided to let laughter pass judgement on his misguided age.  Aesthetic magnanimity cannot help.  Its account has no credit column for the taking of such risks.  If he is silent he must enter the paradox.  - Still another scenario: suppose, for example, someone is in possession of an explanation of a public hero’s life, but one that explains it in a deplorable light, and yet a whole generation rests secure in this hero and has no suspicion of anything of the sort.  14 Which of Socrates’s remarks is to be regarded as the decisive one can be a matter of controversy, since Socrates has been in so many ways poetically volatilized by Plato.  I suggest the following: the death-sentence is announced to him, that instant he dies and fulfils himself in the famous rejoinder that he was surprised to have been condemned with a majority of three votes.  He could have found no more ironic jest in some market-place flippancy or fool’s inanity than in this comment on the death-sentence which condemns him from life itself.  15 In so far as there is any question of an analogy here, the circumstances of the death of Pythagoras provide one.  In his last moments Pythagoras had to consummate the silence he had always maintained, and so he said, ‘It’s better to be killed than to speak.’ cf.  Diogenes, 8th Bk.  § 39.  16 ‘Chai potamou roi apeikadzon ta onta legei hos dis es ton auton potamon ouk embaiis.’ cf.  Plato’s Cratyllus §402, Ast.  3rd B.  Pag.  158.  †cf.  Tennemann Gesch .  d .  Philos.  Ister B.  Pag.  220.  Fear and Trembling FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE In every corner of the world, on every subject under the sun, Penguin represents quality and variety — the very best in publishing today.  For complete information about books available from Penguin — including Penguin Classics, Penguin Compass, and Puffins — and how to order them, write to us at the appropriate address below.  Please note that for copyright reasons the selection of books varies from country to country.  In the United States: Please write to Penguin Group (USA), P.O.  Box 12289 Dept.  B, Newark, Mew Jersey 07101-5289 or call 1-800-788-6262.  In the United Kingdom: Please write to Dept.  EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Bath Road, Harmondsworth, West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 ODA.  In Canada: Please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3.  In Australia: Please write to Penguin Books Australia Ltd, P.O.  Box 257, Ringwond, Victoria 3134.  In New Zealand: Please write to Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Private Bag 102902, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10.  In India: Please write to Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Panchsheel Shopping Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017.  In the Netherlands: Please write to Penguin Books Netherlands bv, Postbus 3507, NL-1001 AH Amsterdam.  In Germany: Please write to Penguin Books Deutschland GmbH, Metzlerstrasse 26, 60594 Frankfurt am Main.  In Spain: Please write to Penguin Books S.  A., Bravo Murillo 19, 1° B, 28015 Madrid.  In Italy: Please write to Penguin Italia s.r.l.  , Via Benedetto Croce 2, 20094 Corsico, Milano.  In France: Please write to Penguin France, Le Carré Wilson, 62 rue Benjamin Baillaud, 31500 Toulouse.  In Japan: Please write to Penguin Books Japan Ltd, Kaneko Building, 2-3-25 Koraku, Bunkyo-Ku,Tokyo 112.  In South Africa: Please write to Penguin Books South Africa (Pty) Ltd, Private Bag X14 , Parkview, 2122 Johannesburg.  Fear and Trembling Problema III Was it Ethically Defensible of Abraham to Conceal his Purpose from Sarah, from Eleazar, from Isaac? The ethical is as such the universal; as the universal it is in turn the disclosed.  Seen as an immediate, no more than sensate and psychic being, the individual is concealed.  So his ethical task is to unwrap himself from this concealment and become disclosed in the universal.  Thus whenever he wants to remain in concealment, he sins and is in a state of temptation, from which he can emerge only by disclosing himself.  We find ourselves again at the same point.  Unless there is a concealment which has its basis in the single individual’s being higher than the universal, then Abraham’s conduct cannot be defended, since he disregarded the intermediate ethical considerations.  If, however, there is such a concealment, then we face the paradox, which cannot be mediated, just because it is based on the single individual’s being, in his particularity, higher than the universal, and it is precisely the universal that is the mediation.  The Hegelian philosophy assumes there is no justified concealment, no justified incommensurability.  It is therefore consistent in its requirement of disclosure, but it isn’t quite fair and square in wanting to regard Abraham as the father of faith and to speak about faith.  For faith is not the first immediacy but a later one.  The first immediacy is the aesthetic, and here the Hegelian philosophy may well be right.  But faith is not the aesthetic, or if it is, then faith has never existed just because it has existed always.  It will be best here to look at the whole matter in a purely aesthetic way and for that purpose embark on an aesthetic inquiry, which I would ask the reader for the time being to enter wholeheartedly into, while I for my part will adapt my presentation accordingly.  The category I would like to examine a little more closely is that of the interesting, a category that especially today (just because we live in discrimine rerum at a turning-point in human affairs) has acquired great importance, for really it is the category of crisis.  Therefore one should not, as sometimes happens, when one has been oneself enamoured of it pro virili with all one’s strength, disdain the category because it has passed one by; but neither should one be too greedy for it, for what is certain is that to become of interest, for one’s life to be interesting, has nothing to do with what you can turn your hand to but is a fateful privilege which, like every privilege in the world of spirit, can only be purchased in deep pain.  Thus Socrates was the most interesting person that has lived, his life the most interesting that has been led, but that existence was allotted to him by the deity, and since he had to work for it he was no stranger to trouble and pain.  Taking such an existence in vain ill-becomes someone who takes life seriously, and yet such attempts are nowadays not infrequently observed.  The category of the interesting is, moreover, a borderline one, it marks the boundary between the aesthetic and the ethical.  For that reason in our inquiry we must be constantly glancing over into the territory of ethics, while to give our inquiries weight the problem must be grasped with genuine aesthetic feeling.  These days ethics rarely considers such things.  The reason is supposed to be that there is no room for them in the System.  But then doing so in monographs should be all right; and besides, if one doesn’t want to be long-winded about it one can achieve the same results by being brief, so long as one has the predicate in one’s power; for a predicate or two can reveal a whole world.  Is there no room in the System for little words like these? Aristotle says in his immortal Poetics: ‘duo men oun tou muthou meri, peri taut’ esti, peripeteia kai anagnorisis’ (cf.  Ch.  II) ’...  indeed two parts in the myth, namely sudden change of fortune the reverse (on which the plot of a tragedy turns) and recognition, concern these things‘.  Naturally only the second feature, anagnorisis, recognition, concerns me here.  Whenever there is recognition there is eo ipso a question of prior concealment.  Just as the recognition is the resolving factor, or the element of relaxation in the life of drama, so is concealment the element of tension.  What Aristotle says earlier in the same chapter in respect of the consequences for the worth of tragedy of the question whether peripeteia and anagnorisis clash, as well as of the ‘single’ and ‘double’ recognition, I cannot go into here, even though the sincerity and quiet absorption of Aristotle’s discussion have an inevitable attraction for one long since tired of the superficial omniscience of the synopticists.  A general observation must suffice.  In Greek tragedy concealment (and therefore recognition) is an epic survival based on a fate in which the dramatic action disappears from view, and from which it acquires its obscure and enigmatic origin.  This is why the effect produced by a Greek tragedy bears a resemblance to the impression given by a marble statue that lacks the power of the eye.  Greek tragedy is blind.  Hence it takes a certain abstraction to appreciate it.  A son murders his father, but not until later learns it is his father.  A sister is about to sacrifice her brother, but at the decisive moment discovers that is who it is.  Tragedy of this nature is less apt to interest our reflective age.  Modern drama has given up the idea of Fate, has in dramatic respects emancipated itself; it observes, it looks in upon itself, takes fate up into its dramatic consciousness.  Concealment and disclosure then become the hero’s free act, for which he is responsible.  Recognition and concealment are also an essential part of modern drama.  It would take us too far to give examples.  I am courteous enough to assume that everyone in this so aesthetically voluptuous age, so potent and aroused that conception occurs as easily as with the partridge which, Aristotle says, needs only to hear the voice of the cock or its flight overhead — to assume that at the mere sound of the word ‘concealment’ everyone can easily shake a dozen romances and comedies from his sleeve.  I can therefore be brief and offer straightaway a fairly broad observation.  If the person doing the hiding, i.e.  the one who puts the dramatic yeast into the play, hides something nonsensical, we have comedy.  But if the concealer is related to the idea, he may come close to being a tragic hero.  To give just one example of the comic.  A man puts on make-up and wears a wig.  The same man wants to have success with the fair sex, and is sure enough of conquests with the help of the make-up and wig, which there is no doubt make him irresistible.  He captures a girl and is on the pinnacle of joy.  But now for the point.  If he can admit his deception, will he not lose all of his powers of fascination once he is revealed as a quite ordinary, in fact even bald-headed male? Doesn’t he have to lose the loved one again? Concealment is his free action, for which aesthetics holds him responsible.  But that discipline is no friend of bald hypocrites, and will leave him to the mercy of our laughter.  Let that suffice as a hint of what I mean, since we cannot include comedy in the terms of this investigation.  My procedure here must be to let concealment pass dialectically between aesthetics and ethics, for the point is to show how absolutely different the paradox and aesthetic concealment are from one another.  A few examples.  A girl is secretly in love, though neither party has openly confessed its love to the other.  Her parents force her to marry another (she may even be motivated out of considerations of duty).  She obeys.  She hides her love ‘so as not to make the other unhappy, and no one will ever know what she suffers’.  — Or a young lad is in a position, just by dropping one word, to possess the object of his craving and restless dreams.  But that little word will compromise, yes, even, who knows, ruin an entire family.  He nobly chooses to stay in concealment, ‘the girl must never know, so that she can perhaps find happiness with another’.  What a pity that these two, both concealed from their respective loved ones, are also concealed from one another! For otherwise a remarkable higher unity might have been brought about.  — Their concealment is a free act, for which even aesthetically they are responsible.  However, aesthetics is a respectful and sentimental discipline which knows more ways of fixing things than any assistant house-manager.  So what does it do? It does everything possible for the lovers.  By means of a coincidence the respective partners in the projected marriages get wind of the other party’s noble decision.  Explanations follow.  They get each other and as a bonus the rank of real heroes as well; for notwithstanding they have had no time even to sleep on their heroic resolutions, aesthetics sees it as if they had bravely fought for their goal over many years.  For aesthetics doesn’t bother much about time; it goes just as quickly whether in jest or earnest.  But ethics knows nothing either of this coincidence or this sentimentality.  Nor does it have such a rapid concept of time.  Thus the matter acquires a different complexion.  You can’t argue with ethics, because it uses pure categories.  It doesn’t appeal to experience, which of all laughable things is perhaps the most laughable and, far from making a man wise, if he knows nothing higher it will sooner make him mad.  Ethics has no coincidence, so no explanations follow; it doesn’t flirt with thoughts of dignity, it puts an enormous burden of responsibility on the hero’s frail shoulders; it condemns as presumptuous his thought of wanting to play providence in his action, but also condemns him for wanting to do likewise with his suffering.  It enjoins the belief in reality and the courage to contend with all its tribulations, rather than with those bloodless sufferings he has taken on himself by his own responsibility; it warns against putting faith in the calculating shrewdness of reason, more treacherous than the oracles of the ancients.  It warns against all misplaced magnanimity.  Let reality decide the occasion, that is the time to show courage.  But then ethics, too, will offer every possible assistance.  If something deeper had been stirring in those two, however, if there had been a seriousness to see the task, to set about it, then no doubt something would have come of them.  But ethics cannot help them.  Ethics is offended because they are keeping a secret from it, a secret they have incurred on their own responsibility.  Thus aesthetics called for concealment and rewarded it.  Ethics called for disclosure and punished concealment.  Sometimes, however, even aesthetics calls for disclosure.  When the hero held captive in the aesthetic illusion believes he can save another by his silence, aesthetics calls for silence and rewards it.  But when the hero’s action involves interfering in another person’s life, it calls for disclosure.  Now I am talking of the tragic hero.  Consider for a moment Euripides’s Iphigenia in Aulis.  Agamemnon is about to sacrifice Iphigenia.  Now aesthetics calls for Agamemnon’s silence, in so far as it would be unworthy of the hero to seek another’s consolation, just as he should keep it quiet as long as possible for the women’s sake.  On the other hand the hero, to be that, has also to be tested in the terrible temptation incurred by the tears of Clytemnestra and Iphigenia.  What does aesthetics do? It has a way out; it has an old servant standing by who discloses everything to Clytemnestra.  And now everything is as it should be.  Ethics, however, has no coincidence, and no old servant standing by.  The aesthetic idea contradicts itself as soon as it is applied in reality.  Ethics therefore demands disclosure.  The tragic hero demonstrates exactly this ethical courage by, not himself being captive to the aesthetic illusion, taking it upon himself to tell Iphigenia her fate.  In this the tragic hero is the beloved son of ethics, in whom she is well pleased.  If he remains silent, it may be because by doing so he makes it easier for others, or it could also be because it makes it easier for himself.  But the tragic hero knows he is free of the latter incentive.  In keeping silent here he would be assuming responsibility as an individual, inasmuch as he is impervious to any argument from outside.  But this, as tragic hero, he cannot do; for it is just in so far as he continues to express the universal that ethics loves him.  His heroic action requires courage, but part of that courage is that he shirks no argument.  Now tears, certainly, are a terrible argumentum ad hominem, and there are no doubt those whom nothing else touches but who can still be stirred by tears.  The play lets Iphigenia weep, in fact like Jephthah’s daughter she should have been allowed two months to weep, not in solitude but at her father’s feet, to use all her art ‘which is but tears’, and twine herself instead of the olive branch about his knees (cf.  v.  1224).  Aesthetics required disclosure but availed itself of a coincidence; ethics required disclosure and found satisfaction in the tragic hero.  For all the strictness of the ethical requirement of disclosure, it cannot be denied that secrecy and silence, as determinants of inner feeling, really make for greatness in a man.  When Amor leaves Psyche he says to her, ‘You will give birth to a child who will be divine if you say nothing, but human if you betray the secret.’ The tragic hero, the darling of ethics, is a purely human being, and he is someone I can understand, someone all of whose undertakings are in the open.  If I go further I always run up against the paradox, the divine and the demonic; for silence is both of these.  It is the demon’s lure, and the more silent one keeps the more terrible the demon becomes; but silence is also divinity’s communion with the individual.  Before coming back to the story of Abraham, however, I would like to present some poetic personages.  By exercising the power of dialectic over them I shall keep them at extremes, and by waving the scourge of despair over them I should prevent them from standing still, so that in their anguish they might perhaps bring something or other to light.  6 Aristotle tells in his Politics of a political disturbance in Delphi, arising from a marriage.  The bridegroom, for whom the augurs had predicted a misfortune as a result of his forthcoming marriage, at the crucial moment, when he is to fetch the bride, suddenly changes his plans — he won’t go through with the wedding.  That is all I need.  7 In Delphi this surely did not pass off without tears.  If a poet took it up he could doubtless count on arousing sympathy.  Is it not terrible that the love so often excluded in life should here also be deprived of the aid of heaven? Isn’t the old proverb that marriages are made in heaven here put to shame? Usually it is the trials and tribulations of finitude which, like evil spirits, would separate the lovers, while love itself has heaven on its side and this holy alliance overwhelms all foes.  Here it is heaven itself that separates what heaven, after all, has joined together.  Who would have guessed? The young bride least of all.  A moment earlier she was sitting in her room in all her beauty, and the sweet young maids had adorned her with such care that they would be prepared to justify their handiwork before the whole world, that it gave them more than happiness, it even made them envious - yes, even happy that they couldn’t be even more envious, since she could not have been more beautiful.  Sitting there alone in her room she was then transfigured from one beauty to another; for all that a woman’s art could accomplish had been turned virtuously to the embellishment of virtue.  But there still lacked something the young girl had not dreamed of, a veil, finer, lighter, and yet more concealing than the one in which the young maids had enveloped her, a bridal gown no maid had knowledge of or could help her with, even the bride herself did not know how to put it on.  It was an unseen, friendly influence which takes satisfaction in adorning a bride and wraps itself around her without her knowledge, for all she saw was the bridegroom walking by on his way to the temple.  She saw the door close after him, and she became even more calm and blissful, for she knew that he now belonged to her more than ever.  The temple door opened, he stepped out, but demurely she turned her gaze down and so did not see that his face was troubled.  Yet he saw that heaven must be jealous of the bride’s loveliness and of his good fortune.  The temple door opened, the young maids saw the bridegroom step out, but they did not see that his face was troubled, for they were busy about bringing the bride.  Then she came forward in all her maidenly modesty, and yet like a mistress surrounded by her cortege of young maids of honour, who curtsied before her as a young maid always curtsies before a bride.  Thus at the head of her lovely troupe she stood and waited — it was but a moment, for the temple was close by — and the bridegroom came, but he passed by her door.  But here I break off.  I am not a poet, I only practise dialectics.  One should note first of all that it is at the crucial moment that the hero learns what is in store, so he is pure and blameless, hasn’t bound himself irresponsibly to the loved one.  Second, it is a divine utterance he has before him, or rather against him, so he is not ruled like those feeble lovers and sweethearts by conceit.  Further, it goes without saying that this utterance makes him just as unhappy as the bride, indeed rather more so since after all he is the occasion.  True, the augurs only predicted a misfortune for him, but the question is whether the misfortune is not of such a nature as to affect also their marital happiness.  So what is he to do? (I) Is he to remain silent and get married and think ‘Perhaps the misfortune won’t come right away, and anyway I have been true to my love and not afraid to make myself unhappy; but I must remain silent, otherwise even the brief moment is lost.’ This sounds plausible but is in fact by no means so, for in this he insults the girl.  By keeping silent he has in a way made her guilty, for had she known the truth she would never have given her consent to such a union.  So in the hour of need he will have to bear not only the misfortune but also the responsibility for not having said anything, as well as her righteous anger at his not having said anything.  (2) Is he to remain silent and not get married? In that case he must enter into a deception in which he annihilates himself in his relation to her.  Aesthetics might approve of this.  The catastrophe could then be fashioned as in the real story except that at the last moment there would be explanations, though too late since aesthetically it will be necessary to let him die, unless that discipline can see its way to revoking the fateful prophecy.  Yet, noble as this conduct may be, it involves an insult to the girl and the reality of her love.  (3) Is he to speak? Naturally one mustn’t forget that our hero is a little too poetic for the giving up of his love to have no importance except as an unsuccessful business venture.  If he speaks, then the whole thing becomes an unfortunate love-story in the vein of Axel and Valborg.  They will be a couple whom heaven itself puts asunder.  Nevertheless in the present case this separation is to be conceived somewhat differently, since it, too, is also the result of the free acts of the individuals.  For what is so very difficult with the dialectic in this case is that the misfortune is to affect only him.  These two, then, do not find a common expression of their suffering, as do Axel and Valborg, whom heaven separates equally from each other because they are equally close to each other.  8 If that were the case here, a way out could be found.  For since heaven uses no visible power to separate them, but leaves it to them, one could well imagine that they ended united in defiance of heaven together with its misfortune.  Ethics, however, will require him to speak.  The essence of his valour in that case is to be found in his giving up his aesthetic high-mindedness, which here could hardly be thought to contain any admixture of the vanity connected with concealment, since it must be clear to him that he still makes the girl unhappy.  The reality of this heroism is based, however, on its having had and cancelled its presupposition that he genuinely loved her and kept quiet for her sake and not his — translator’s addition; for otherwise we would get heroes enough, particularly in our own time which has acquired a matchless proficiency in the forgery that does the highest by skipping over what lies in between.  But why this sketch if I nevertheless come no further than the tragic hero? Because it might still throw light on the paradox.  That all depends on our hero’s relationship to that utterance of the augur’s, which in one way or another is going to decide the course of his life.  Is this utterance publici juris public property or is it a privatissimum private matter? The scene is laid in Greece; an augur’s utterance is intelligible to all — I don’t mean just in the sense that the individual can grasp the content lexically, but that the individual can understand that what an augur is conveying to him is a decision of heaven’s.  So the augur’s utterance is intelligible not just to the hero but to everyone and results in no private relation to the divine.  Turn where he will, what was prophesied will happen, and neither by doing anything nor by refraining from doing anything will he come into a closer relationship with the divine, become an object either of divine mercy or of divine wrath.  The outcome will be as understandable to anyone as to the hero, and there is no secret writing that only the hero can read.  So should he want to speak he can perfectly well do so, for he can make himself understood; and if he wants to remain silent it is because he wants, by virtue of being the single individual, to be higher than the universal, wants to delude himself with all manner of phantasies about how she will soon forget this sorrow, etc.  On the other hand, if the will of heaven had not been announced to him by an augur, if it had been made known to him in some quite private way, if it had placed itself in a quite private relationship to him, then we are with the paradox - supposing there is such a thing (since my reflections here have the form of a dilemma) — then he could not speak however much he might wish to.  He would not enjoy his own silence but suffer the pain, yet for him just this would be the assurance he needed that he did right.  So the reason for his silence would not be a wish to place himself as the single individual in an absolute relation to the universal, but to be placed as the single individual in an absolute relationship to the absolute.  In this, so far as I can tell, he would also be able to find repose, whereas the requirements of the ethical would be constantly disturbing his high-minded silence.  One only wishes that aesthetics might try to start where for so many years it has ended, with the illusion of high-mindedness.  As soon as it did so it would work hand in hand with religion, for that is the only power capable of rescuing the aesthetic from its conflict with the ethical.  Queen Elizabeth sacrifices to the State her love for Essex by signing his death-warrant.  That was a deed of heroism, even if some private resentment had a hand in it because he hadn’t sent her the ring.  We know that he did send it, but it was held back through the malice of some lady-in-waiting.  Elizabeth is said, ni fallor if I am not mistaken, to have been informed of this, and sat for ten days with one finger in her mouth, biting it without saying a word, and then she died.  That would be something for a poet who knew how to wrench open the mouth; otherwise it would be of use at best to a ballet master, with whom nowadays the poet no doubt too often confuses himself.  I now want to follow this by a sketch along the lines of the demonic.  For this I shall use the legend of Agnete and the Merman.  The merman is a seducer who rises up from concealment in the depths, and in wild desire grasps and breaks the innocent flower standing in all its charm by the shore, pensively bending its head to the ocean’s roar.  That is what the poets have so far made of it.  Let us make a change.  The merman was a seducer.  He has called out to Agnete, with his smooth talk has coaxed from her her secret thoughts.  She has found in the merman what she was seeking, what she gazed down to find in the depths of the sea.  Agnete is willing to follow him down.  The merman has taken her into his arms, Agnete twines hers about his neck trustingly and with all her soul she abandons herself to the stronger one.  He is already at the sea-edge, bending over the water to dive down with his prey.  Then Agnete looks at him again, not fearfully, not questioningly, not proud of her good luck, not intoxicated with desire, but in absolute faith, with absolute humility, like the humble flower she deemed herself to be; with absolute confidence she entrusts to him her entire fate.  — And look! The ocean roars no more, its wild voice is stilled, nature’s passion - which is the merman’s strength — deserts him, the sea becomes dead calm.  And still Agnete is looking at him in this way.  Then the merman collapses, he is unable to resist the power of innocence, his element becomes unfaithful to him, he cannot seduce Agnete.  He leads her home again, he explains to her that he only wanted to show her how beautiful the sea is when it is calm, and Agnete believes him.  Then he turns back alone, and the ocean rages, but more wildly still rages the merman’s despair.  He can seduce Agnete, he can seduce hundreds of Agnetes, he can charm any girl — but Agnete has triumphed and the merman has lost her.  Only as his prize can she become his; he cannot belong faithfully to any girl, for he is only a merman.  I have allowed myself a slight modification 9 in the merman.  In fact I have slightly altered Agnete too.  In the legend Agnete is by no means guiltless — and in general it is nonsense and sheer coquetry as well as an insult to the female sex to imagine a seduction where the girl is in no way, in no way at all, to blame.  In the legend Agnete is, to modernize my expression somewhat, a woman who hankers for ‘the interesting’, and one such can always be certain there is a merman in the offing; for mermen keep a weather-eye open for the likes of these and they make for them like a shark for its prey.  It is therefore very foolish to suppose (or is it a rumour spread abroad by the merman?) that so-called refinement protects a girl from seduction.  No, life is more just and fair; there is only one means of protection, it is innocence.  We will now give the merman a human consciousness, and let his being a merman indicate a human pre-existence in the consequences of which his life has become entangled.  There is nothing to prevent his being a hero; for the step he now takes is reconciliatory.  He is saved by Agnete, the seducer is crushed, he has bowed to the power of innocence, he can never seduce again.  But immediately two powers claim control of him: repentance alone and repentance with Agnete.  If repentance alone takes possession of him he remains concealed, if repentance and Agnete take possession of him he is disclosed.  And the sea roars and the waves foam, and the merman embraces Agnete, and dives with her into the depths.  Never had he been so wild, never so full of desire; for with this girl he had hoped for his deliverance.  Before long he became tired of Agnete, but her body was never found: for she became a mermaid, who tempted men with her songs.  Now in so far as repentance alone grips the merman and he remains concealed, then he must certainly make Agnete unhappy; for Agnete loved him in all her innocence, she believed him that moment when even to her he seemed changed, however well he concealed it, and said he only wanted to show her the beautiful calm of the sea.  However, as far as passion is concerned, the merman himself becomes even more unhappy; for he loved Agnete with a multiplicity of passions and has a new guilt to bear besides.  The demonic side of repentance will now no doubt explain to him that this is precisely his punishment, and the more it torments him the better.  If he gives in to this demonic possibility, he may make one more attempt to save Agnete, in the way one can in a sense save someone by resort to evil.  He knows Agnete loves him.  If he can only tear this love away from her she will in a way be saved.  But how to do that? The merman has too much sense to reckon that a candid confession will arouse her disgust.  Then perhaps he will try to arouse all dark passions in her, scorn her, mock her, hold her love up to ridicule, if possible stir up her pride.  He will spare himself no torment, for this is the deep contradiction in the demonic and in a sense there dwells infinitely more good in a demonic than in a superficial person.  The more selfish Agnete is, the more easily she will be deceived (only those with very little experience think it easy to deceive innocence, life is very profound and it is the astute who find it easiest to trick one another), but all the more terribly the merman will suffer.  The more ingeniously contrived his deception the less will Agnete bashfully hide her own pain from him; she will use every means, not without effect, not, that is, to shake him loose but to torment him.  By means of the demonic the merman would thus aspire to be the single individual who as the particular is higher than the universal.  The demonic has that same property as the divine, that the individual can enter into an absolute relationship to it.  This is the analogue, the counterpart to the paradox we are discussing.  It therefore bears a certain resemblance to it that can prove misleading.  Thus the merman apparently has the proof of the justification of his silence that it is because of it that he suffers all his pain.  However, there is no doubt that he can speak.  So he can be a tragic hero, to my mind a tragic hero on the grand scale, if he does speak.  Perhaps only few will understand what the grandeur consists in.  10 He will then have the courage to free himself of all self-deception about being able to make Agnete happy by his art; he will have the courage to crush Agnete, humanly speaking.  Here I will just add a psychological observation.  The more selfish we make Agnete, the more effective the self-deception will be, indeed it is not inconceivable that with his demonic astuteness a merman might in reality not only have, humanly speaking, saved Agnete but brought something exceptional out of her.  A demon knows how to torture powers out of even the weakest person, and in his way he can have the best intentions towards a human being.  The merman stands at a dialectical extremity.  If he is saved from the demonic side of repentance two paths are possible.  He can hold himself back, remain in hiding, but not depend on his astuteness.  In that case he does not come as the single individual into an absolute relation to the demonic, but finds repose in the counter-paradox that the divine will save Agnete.  (This is how the movement would have been made in the Middle Ages, for on its conception the merman has obviously dedicated himself to the monastery.) Or else he can be saved through Agnete.  Now this must not be understood as meaning that Agnete’s love might save him from being a seducer in the future (that is an aesthetic rescue attempt, which always avoids the main issue, namely the continuity in the merman’s life); in that respect he is already saved.  He will be saved in so far as he is disclosed.  So he marries Agnete.  But he must still resort to the paradox.  For when through his own guilt the individual has come out of the universal, he can only return to it on the strength of having come, as the particular, into an absolute relation to the absolute.  Here I will insert a comment which takes us further than anything that has been said anywhere in the foregoing.  11 Sin is not the first immediacy, sin is a later immediacy.  In sin the individual is already in terms of the demonic paradox higher than the universal, because it is a contradiction on the part of the universal to want to impose itself on someone who lacks the conditio sine qua non the necessary condition.  Should philosophy, amongst its other conceits, imagine that someone might actually want to follow its precepts in practice, a curious comedy would emerge.  An ethics that ignores sin is an altogether futile discipline, but once it postulates sin it has eo ipso thereby gone beyond itself.  Philosophy tells us that the immediate is to be superseded ophœvet, German aufgehoben .  True enough, but what is not true is that sin, any more than faith, is without further ado the immediate.  Everything goes smoothly so long as I move in these spheres, but in fact not even what is said here helps to explain Abraham.  He did not become the single individual through sin; on the contrary he was that righteous man who is God’s chosen.  So any analogy with Abraham will only surface after the individual has become capable of accomplishing the universal, and now the paradox is repeated.  I can therefore understand the movements of the merman, but I cannot understand Abraham.  It is to realize the universal that the merman has recourse to the paradox.  If he stays hidden and dedicates himself to all the torments of repentance, he becomes a demon, and as such is brought to nothing.  If he stays hidden but entertains no clever thoughts about being able to extricate Agnete at the cost of his own torment in the bondage of repentance, he will no doubt find peace but is lost to the world.  If he discloses himself, lets himself be saved through Agnete, then he is the greatest human being I can imagine.  It is only aesthetics which irresponsibly thinks it can praise the power of love by letting the lost man be loved by an innocent girl and saved thereby.  Only aesthetics mistakes what it sees and thinks the girl rather than the merman is the hero.  So the merman cannot belong to Agnete before, after making the infinite movement of repentance, he has made one more movement, that on the strength of the absurd.  His own strength suffices for the movement of repentance, but it calls for absolutely all his energies, and it is therefore impossible for him by his own strength to return and grasp reality.  If one lacks sufficient passion to make either movement, when one scrimps through life, repenting a little and thinking the rest will take care of itself, one has given up living in the idea once and for all, and then it is very easy to reach, and help others reach, the highest; i.e.  delude oneself and others with the notion that the world of spirit is like Gnavspil a card game, where everyone cheats.  So one can amuse oneself by reflecting how strange it is that just in an age when everyone can reach the highest there should be such widespread doubt about the immortality of the soul; since even someone who has only, but genuinely, made the movement of infinity can scarcely be called a doubter.  The conclusions of passion are the only reliable, i.e.  the only convincing, ones.  Fortunately life is in this case more kindly, more faithful, than the wise would have it.  It excludes no one, not even the humblest; it tricks nobody, for in the world of spirit the only people who are tricked are those who trick themselves.  It is the general opinion, and as far as I dare be my own judge, also my own, that entering the monastery is not the highest.  But I by no means believe on that account that the fact that nobody goes into monasteries today means that we are all greater than those profound and earnest souls who found repose there.  How many people are there now with the passion to think this thought and then judge themselves honestly? The very idea of thus taking time on one’s conscience, of giving conscience time to search out with its sleepless perseverance every secret thought, so that unless one is making the movement every instant on the strength of what is noblest and most holy in a human being one can discover with anguish and horror, 12 and call forth by anguish itself if by nothing else, the dark passions which after all lie concealed in every human life, whereas living in society with others one so easily forgets, so easily avoids, is in so many ways held above all this, gets the chance to start again - this very idea, grasped with decent respect, I would have thought could in itself chasten many an individual in this age of ours which thinks it has already reached the highest.  Yet such things worry people little in this age that thinks it has reached the heights, though no age has fallen so much victim to the comic than ours.  Indeed it is hard to grasp why it hasn’t already given birth, by a generatio cequivoca spontaneous generation, to its hero, that demon who will stage without scruple that horrifying play that reduces the whole age to laughter and to unconsciousness of the fact that it is laughing at itself.  Indeed what more is life worth than to be laughed at when people have already reached the highest by the time they are twenty? And yet what higher movement has the age come up with since people gave up entering monasteries? Is it not a contemptible worldliness, a circumspection and pusillanimity that sits at the head of the table, cravenly making people think they have reached the highest, and even slyly dissuading them from trying anything less? A person who has made the monastery movement has only one movement to go, that of the absurd.  How many nowadays understand what the absurd is, how many live in such a way as to have renounced or gained everything, how many are even simply honest enough to know what they are and what they can and cannot do? And is it not true that if there are such, they are mostly to be found among the less educated and in part among women? Just as a demonic person always reveals himself without understanding himself, our age betrays its own defects in a kind of clairvoyance, for it is always calling for the comical.  If that was really what it needed then perhaps the theatre would need a new play in which someone’s dying for love was treated as comedy.  Or would it not be better for our age if that were really to happen, if it were actually to witness such an occurrence, so that it might acquire the courage to believe in the power of spirit, the courage to stop abjectly stifling its better impulses, stop jealously stifling them in others - with laughter? Does the age really need a ridiculous Erscheinung appearance, show of an enthusiast in order to have something to laugh at? Or does it not rather need such an enthusiastic figure in reality to remind it of what it has forgotten? If one wants a scenario along similar lines but more moving because the passion of repentance is not awakened, one can use a story from the Book of Tobit.  The young Tobias wishes to marry Sarah, the daughter of Raguel and Edna.  But the girl is surrounded in tragedy.  She has been betrothed to seven men all of whom have died in the bride’s house.  For my scenario this is a flaw in the story, since there is something almost irresistibly comical in the thought of a girl’s seven vain attempts to get married, although so near success, as near as a student who fails his finals seven times.  The Book of Tobit places the accent elsewhere and that makes the high number important and in a certain sense even contributes to the tragic effect.  It enhances the young Tobias’s high-mindedness, partly because he is his parents’ only son (6.14), partly because the deterrent obtrudes the more strongly.  So this feature must be omitted.  Sarah, then, is a girl who has never been in love, who still nurtures a young girl’s notion of bliss, her immense mortgage in life, her Vollmachtbrief zum Glücke authorization for happiness - to love a man with all her heart.  And yet she is the most unhappy of all, for she knows that the evil demon that loves her will kill the bridegroom on the wedding night.  I have read of much sorrow, but I doubt if anywhere there is a sorrow as deep as that residing in the life of that girl.  Nevertheless when the misfortune comes from outside there is a certain consolation.  If life fails to bring a person what would make him happy, it is still a comfort that he could have received it.  But the unfathomable sorrow which no time can disperse, no time heal, is to know that it would be no use even if life were to do everything! A Greek author conceals so infinitely much in his crude naïvet é when he says: ‘pantos gar oudeis Erota epfugen i feuksetai mechri an kallos i kai ofthalmoi Bleposin’ ’...  for certainly no one has yet altogether escaped love, and none shall so long as there is beauty and eyes to see‘ (cf.  Longi Pastoralia).  Many a girl has been made unhappy in love, but she became unhappy; Sarah was so before she became it.  It is hard enough that one should not find the one to whom one can devote oneself, but unspeakably hard to be unable to devote oneself.  A young girl surrenders herself to someone and then she is said no longer to be free, but Sarah was never free and yet never surrendered herself to anyone.  It is hard enough that a girl should surrender herself to someone and be deceived by her love, but Sarah was deceived before she surrendered herself.  What world of sorrow is not contained in what follows, when at length Tobias wishes to marry Sarah! What wedding-rites, what preparations! No girl was ever cheated as Sarah.  She was cheated of the most blessed of all things, the absolute wealth which even the poorest girl possesses, cheated of the secure, unbounded, unfettered, unbridled self-surrender of devotion.  For first there had to be the ritual of purification by placing the heart of a fish and its liver on glowing embers.  And what a mother’s leave-taking of the daughter who, just as she herself has been cheated of everything, must also cheat her own mother of her most beautiful possession.  One just reads the narrative.  Edna prepared the chamber and brought Sarah into it and wept, and she received the tears of her daughter - and said to her, ‘My child, take heart.  The Lord of heaven and earth may exchange your sorrow for joy.  Daughter, take heart.’ And now the moment for the wedding.  We read on, if we can for tears: ‘But when the door was shut and they were together, Tobias rose from the bed and said, “Rise up, sister, and we will pray that the Lord may have mercy on us”’ (8.4).  Were a poet to read this story and use it, I wager a hundred to one he would place all the emphasis on the young Tobias.  The heroism of being willing to risk his life in such obvious danger, of which the narrative reminds us once again, for the morning after the wedding Raguel says to Edna: ‘Send one of the maids to see if he is still alive, so that, if not, we can bury him and no one will know it’ (cf.  8.13) - this heroism would have been the theme for the poet.  I venture to propose another.  Certainly Tobias acted gallantly, resolutely, and chivalrously, but any man who lacks courage to do that is a milksop who knows neither what love is nor what it is to be a man, nor what is worth living for.  He has not even grasped the little mystery that it is better to give than to receive, and has no inkling of what the great mystery is, namely that it is much harder to receive than to give, that is if one has had the courage to go without and did not prove a coward in the hour of need.  No, Sarah is the heroine.  Her I would like to draw close to as I have drawn close to no other girl, or been tempted to draw close in thought to anyone of whom I have read.  For what love for God it takes to want to be healed when one has been crippled from the start for no fault of one’s own, an unsuccessful specimen of humanity from the very beginning! What ethical maturity to take on the responsibility of allowing the loved one such an act of daring! What humility before another person! What faith in God that in the next instant she should not hate the man to whom she owed everything! Let Sarah be a man and the demonic will not be far away.  A proud and noble nature can endure everything, but one thing it cannot endure, it cannot endure pity.  Pity implies an indignity that for such a person can only be inflicted from above, for in himself he can never become an object of pity.  If he has sinned he can endure the punishment without despairing, but to be singled out from his mother’s womb as an object of pity, a sweet fragrance in pity’s nostrils, that he cannot bear.  Pity has a curious dialectic; one moment it calls for guilt, the next it wants to do away with it, and so to be predestined to pity is the more dreadful the greater the individual’s misfortune lies in the direction of the spiritual.  But no guilt attaches to Sarah, she is thrown as a prey to every suffering and on top of that has to be tortured by human sympathy, for even I who admire her more than Tobias loves her, even I cannot mention her name without exclaiming ‘The poor girl!’ Let a man take Sarah’s place, let him know that if he is to love a girl an infernal spirit will come and murder her on the wedding night, then he would certainly be likely to choose the demonic, shut himself up in himself and say in his heart, as does the demonic nature, ‘Thanks, I am no friend of ceremony and fuss, I don’t at all insist on the pleasures of love, I can just as well be a Bluebeard who gets his pleasure seeing girls die on their wedding night.’ One generally hears very little about the demonic, in spite of this territory’s having a peculiarly valid claim to discovery in our time, and notwithstanding that once he knows how to establish a certain rapport with the demon an observer can, at least in some respect or other, use almost anyone as an example.  In this respect Shakespeare is and will always remain a hero.  That horrid demon, the most demonic figure Shakespeare ever portrayed, and did so incomparably, Gloucester (later Richard III), what made him a demon? Obviously that he could not endure the pity that had been piled on him from childhood.  His monologue in the first act of King Richard III is worth more than all moral systems, none of which bears a hint of the terrors of existence and of their nature.  I, that am rudely stamped, and want love’s majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time Into this breathing world scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them ...  Natures like Gloucester’s cannot be saved by mediating them into an idea of society.  Ethics really only makes fun of them, just as it would make a mockery of Sarah if it were to say to her, ‘Why don’t you express the universal and get married?’ Such natures are aboriginally in the paradox, and they are by no means less perfect than others; it is only that they are either damned in the demonic paradox or delivered in the divine.  Now people have been pleased to think from time immemorial that witches, gnomes, trolls, etc.  are misshapen creatures, and it is undeniable that we all have a tendency when we see a misshapen person directly to link this idea with that of moral perversion.  But what colossal injustice! It should really be the other way around.  It is life itself that has corrupted them, as a stepmother makes degenerates of her stepchildren.  To be put outside the universal from the start, by nature or by historical circumstance, that is the beginning of the demonic, and the individual can hardly be blamed for that.  So Cumberland’s Jew is also a demon notwithstanding his beneficence.  Thus the demonic can also express itself in contempt for men, a contempt which it should nevertheless be noted does not make the demonic person himself act contemptuously; on the contrary his strength is his knowledge that he is better than all who pass judgement on him.  — On all such matters the poets should be the first to make a stir.  God knows what books our young versifiers are reading these days! Their studies are no doubt confined to learning rhymes by rote.  Heaven knows what importance they have in life! Just now I couldn’t honestly tell you whether they are good for anything but to give us edifying proof of the immortality of the soul, to the extent at least that one can safely say of them what Baggesen says of the city’s poet, Kildevalle: ‘if he is immortal then we all are’.  - What has been said here about Sarah, almost in the style of a poetic production, appealing therefore in effect only to the imagination, finds its full significance if out of psychological interest one probes the meaning of the old saying: ‘ nullum unquam exstitit magnum ingenium sine aliqua dementia’ ‘there was never great genius without some madness’.  For the dementia here is the genius’s suffering in life, is the expression, if I may say so, of divine jealousy, while genius itself is the mark of divine favour.  Thus the genius is disorientated from the start in relation to the universal and put into relation to the paradox, whether, in despair over his own limitation, which in his own eyes turns his omnipotence into impotence, he seeks a demonic reassurance and therefore will not admit the limitation to either God or man, or he reassures himself religiously in love for the divine.  There are psychological topics here to which it seems to me one could happily devote a lifetime, and yet we so rarely hear a word about them.  How is madness related to genius? Can the one be constructed out of the other? In what sense and to what extent is the genius master of his own madness? For it goes without saying that to some degree he is indeed its master, otherwise he would really be mad.  Performing such observations requires, however, a high order of ingenuity as well as love, since performing observations on people of superior talent is extremely difficult.  If one bears this in mind in reading some of those authors most celebrated for their genius, it is conceivable that one might just, once in a while, though only with great effort, find out something.  I would like to consider one more case of an individual wanting to save the universal by his concealment and silence.  I shall take the legend of Faust.  Faust is a doubter, 13 an apostate of the spirit who goes the way of the flesh.  This is how the poets see it, and although it is repeated over and over again that every age has its Faust, poets still doggedly follow one another down this same beaten path.  Let us make a slight change.  Faust is a doubter kat‘eksochen in an eminent sense; but he has a sympathetic nature.  Even in Goethe’s understanding of Faust I miss a deeper psychological insight into the secret conversations which doubt has with itself.  Nowadays, when indeed all have experienced doubt, no poet has as yet made a move in this direction.  I could think of offering them Royal Securities to write on, to put down ‘all’ they have experienced in this regard - for it is unlikely that what they have to say will take more than the left-hand margin.  Only when one turns Faust back in on himself in this way — only then can the doubt appear poetically, only then does he himself genuinely discover in reality all its sufferings.  Then he knows it is spirit that sustains life, but he also knows that the security and happiness people live in are not supported by the power of spirit but can be readily explained as unreflective bliss.  As a doubter, as the doubter, he is above all that, and if someone wants to deceive him into supposing that he had put doubt behind him, he easily sees through that.  One who has made a movement in the world of spirit, hence an infinite movement, can tell at once from the spoken line whether the speaker is a man of experience or a Münchhausen.  What a Tamerlane could do with his Huns, Faust knows he can do with his doubt - frighten people out of their wits, make the very world shake under their feet, send people scattering in every direction, and cause the cry of alarm to sound from every quarter.  And if he does that he is still not a Tamerlane, for having the warrant of thought he is in a sense authorized to act in this way.  But Faust has a sympathetic nature, he loves life, his soul knows no envy, he sees he would be unable to prevent the landslide that would no doubt be set in motion, he has no wish for Herostratic honour — he remains silent, he hides his doubt in his soul more assiduously than the girl the fruit of her sinful love beneath her heart, he tries as well as he can to walk in step with others, but as far as what goes on inside him, that he consumes internally and in this way he makes himself a sacrifice to the universal.  Sometimes, when some eccentric raises the whirlwind of doubt, one hears the complaint: ‘If only he had kept quiet.’ Faust too represents this notion.  Anyone with any idea of what it means to live on spirit knows also what the hunger of doubt means, and that the doubter hungers just as much for the daily bread of life as for the sustenance of spirit.  Even though all the pain Faust suffers can be a fairly good argument for its not being pride that possesses him, I shall nevertheless avail myself of a small precautionary device which is easy enough for me to come by, who, just as Gregory of Rimini was called tortor infantium because he subscribed to the damnation of infants, might be tempted to call myself tortor heroum - I am very inventive when it comes to torturing heroes.  Faust sees Marguerite - not after he has chosen the life of pleasure, since my Faust doesn’t choose pleasure at all - he sees Marguerite not in Mephistopheles’s concave mirror but in all her lovable innocence, and because his soul has preserved its love for humankind he can also very well fall in love with her.  But he is a doubter, his doubt has destroyed reality for him.  So ideal is my Faust that he is not one of those scientific doubters who doubt for an hour every term at the lectern but can otherwise do anything, as indeed they do without the help of spirit or on its strength.  He is a doubter, and the doubter hungers as much for his daily slice of joy as for the nourishment of spirit.  But still he stays true to his decision, is silent, and talks to no one of his doubt, nor to Marguerite of his love.  It goes without saying that Faust is too ideal a figure to be satisfied with the tattle that if he spoke he would only set a more general discussion in motion, or that the whole affair would blow over without consequences, or perhaps this or perhaps that.  (Here, as will be obvious to any poet, lies the dormant comedy in our scenario, bringing Faust into ironical relation to those slapstick fools who nowadays chase after doubt, produce an external argument, e.g.  a doctor’s certificate, to show that they have really doubted, or take an oath that they have doubted everything, or else prove it by the fact that on their journey they met up with a doubter — those express couriers and sprint-experts in the world of spirit who in all haste gather a little hint of doubt from this person and a little hint of faith from that, and then wirtschafte do business as best they may depending on whether the congregation wants fine sand or coarse sand.) Faust is too ideal a figure to walk about in slippers.  No one who lacks an infinite passion is ideal and anyone who does have an infinite passion has long since saved his soul from such rubbish.  He is silent so as to offer himself - or else he talks, well knowing that he will put everything into confusion.  He is silent, so ethics condemns him.  It says: ‘You must acknowledge the universal, and you do that by speaking, and you dare not take pity on the universal.’ This is something one should not forget when one sometimes judges a doubter severely for speaking.  I myself am not inclined to judge such conduct leniently, but here as everywhere it is a question of the movements occurring properly.  If things go wrong, then a doubter, even if by speaking he should bring all manner of misfortune upon the world, would still be far preferable to these miserable sweet-tooths who try a taste of everything and would cure doubt without being acquainted with it, and are therefore as a rule the immediate cause of outbreaks of ungoverned and unmanageable doubt.  - If he speaks he confuses everything, for if nothing happens he only finds that out afterwards, and the consequence can be of no help either in the moment of acting or in questions of responsibility.  If he is silent on his own responsibility, he may indeed be acting magnanimously, but to his other pains there is added a little temptation.  The universal will be forever plaguing him and saying, ‘You should have spoken, how can you be certain that it wasn’t after all some hidden pride that prompted your decision?’ If on the other hand the doubter can be the single individual who as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute, then he receives authorization for his silence.  But then he must make guilt of his doubt.  But then he is in the paradox.  But then his doubt is cured, even though he can acquire another.  Even the New Testament would approve such a silence.  There are passages in the New Testament even extolling irony, so long as it is the better side that it is used to conceal.  However, this movement is just as much a movement of irony as any other movement based on subjectivity’s being higher than reality.  This is something no one nowadays wants to know; generally people want to know no more about irony than Hegel has said about it, though curiously enough he had rather little understanding of it and indeed bore a grudge against it which our age finds good reason not to give up, seeing that for it irony is simply something it must guard itself against.  The Sermon on the Mount says: ‘But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto men to fast.’ The passage gives clear testimony to subjectivity’s incommensurability with reality, indeed even to its having the right to deceive.  If only those people who wander about these days with vague talk of the idea of the congregation would read the New Testament, they might come upon other ideas.  But now Abraham.  How did he act? For I have not forgotten, and the reader may now be pleased to recall, that this was the point to which the whole preceding discussion was intended to lead.  Not to make Abraham more intelligible thereby, but in order that his unintelligibility might be seen more in the round, for, as I have said, I cannot understand Abraham, I can only admire him.  It was also mentioned that none of the stages described contained an analogue of Abraham, they were elaborated only so as to indicate, from the point of view of their own sphere, the boundary of the unknown land by the points of discrepancy.  If there should be any question of an analogy here it would have to be the paradox of sin, but that again belongs to another sphere and cannot explain Abraham, and is itself far easier to explain than Abraham.  So Abraham did not speak.  He spoke neither to Sarah, to Eleazar, nor to Isaac.  He passed over these three ethical authorities.  Because for Abraham the ethical had no higher expression than that of family life.  Aesthetics allowed, in fact demanded, silence of the individual when by remaining silent he could save another.  This is already enough to show that Abraham does not lie within the circumference of aesthetics.  His silence is not at all to save Isaac, as in general the whole task of sacrificing Isaac for his own and God’s sake is an outrage aesthetically.  Aesthetics can well understand that I sacrifice myself, but not that I should sacrifice another for my own sake.  The aesthetic hero was silent.  Ethics condemned him, however, because it was on the strength of his accidental particularity that he remained silent.  His human prescience was what determined that he should be silent.  This ethics cannot forgive.  All such human insight is only an illusion.  Ethics demands an infinite movement which requires disclosure.  So the aesthetic hero can indeed speak but will not.  The genuine tragic hero sacrifices himself and everything he has for the universal; his action, every emotion in him belongs to the universal, he is revealed, and in this disclosure he is the beloved son of ethics.  This does not apply to Abraham.  He does nothing for the universal and he is concealed.  We are now at the paradox.  Either the individual as the particular can stand in an absolute relation to the absolute, and then the ethical is not the highest, or Abraham is done for, he is neither a tragic hero nor an aesthetic hero.  Here again the paradox might seem the easiest and most convenient thing of all.  However, I must repeat that anyone who remains convinced of that is not the knight of faith, for distress and anguish are the only justification conceivable, even though they cannot be conceived in general, for if they could the paradox would be cancelled.  Abraham is silent — but he cannot speak, therein lies the distress and anguish.  For if when I speak I cannot make myself understood, I do not speak even if I keep talking without stop day and night.  This is the case with Abraham.  He can say what he will, but there is one thing he cannot say and since he cannot say it, i.e.  say it in a way that another understands it, he does not speak.  The relief of speech is that it translates me into the universal.  Now Abraham can say the most beautiful things any language can muster about how he loves Isaac.  But this is not what he has in mind, that being the deeper thought that he would have to sacrifice Isaac because it was a trial.  This no one can understand, and so no one can but misunderstand the former.  Of this distress the tragic hero knows nothing.  In the first place he has the consolation that all counter-arguments have been done justice to, that he has been able to give Clytemnestra, Iphigenia, Achilles, the Chorus, every living being, every voice from the heart of humankind, every intelligent, every anxious, every accusing, every compassionate thought an opportunity to stand up against him.  He can be sure that all that it is possible to say against him has been said, unsparingly, mercilessly - and to contend with the whole world is a comfort, but to contend with oneself dreadful.  - He need have no fear of having overlooked something, of later having to cry out like King Edward IV at the news of the death of Clarence: Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath, Kneeled at my feet and bid me be advised? Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love? The tragic hero knows nothing of the terrible responsibility of solitude.  Moreover, he has the comfort of being able to weep and wail with Clytemnestra and Iphigenia - and sobbing and crying give relief, while groans that cannot be uttered are torture.  Agamemnon can rally himself quickly to the certainty that he will act, and he therefore still has time to bring comfort and courage.  This Abraham cannot do.  When his heart is stirred, when his words would convey a blessed consolation for the whole world, he dare not console, for would not Sarah, would not Eleazar, would not Isaac say to him, ‘Why do you want to do this, you can after all refrain’? And if in his distress he should want to unburden his feelings and embrace everything dear to him before taking the final step, then this might have the most frightful consequence that Sarah, that Eleazar, that Isaac would be offended in him and believe him a hypocrite.  Talk he cannot, he speaks no human language.  Though he himself understood all the tongues of the world, though the loved ones understood them too — he still could not talk - he speaks a divine tongue - he ‘speaks with tongues’.  This distress I can well understand.  I can admire Abraham.  I have no fear that anyone should be tempted by this story to want irresponsibly to be the single individual.  But I also confess that I myself lack the courage for that, and that I would gladly renounce any prospect of coming further if only it were possible for me to come that far, however late in the day.  Abraham can refrain at any moment, he can repent the whole thing as a temptation.  Then he can speak, then all will understand him — but then he is no longer Abraham.  Abraham cannot speak.  What would explain everything, that it is a trial - though note, one in which the ethical is the temptation - is something he cannot say (i.e.  in a way that can be understood).  Anyone so placed is an emigrant from the sphere of the universal.  And yet what comes next he is even less able to say.  For, as was made sufficiently clear earlier, Abraham makes two movements.  He makes the infinite movement of resignation and gives up his claim to Isaac, something no one can understand because it is a private undertaking.  But then he further makes, and at every moment is making, the movement of faith.  This is his comfort.  For he says, ‘Nevertheless it won’t happen, or if it does the Lord will give me a new Isaac on the strength of the absurd.’ The tragic hero does at least get to the end of the story.  Iphigenia bows to her father’s decision, she herself makes the infinite movement of resignation and they now understand one another.  She is able to understand Agamemnon because his undertaking expresses the universal.  If on the other hand Agamemnon were to say to her, ‘Even though the deity demands you as a sacrifice, it’s still possible that he didn’t — on the strength of the absurd’, he would instantly become unintelligible to her.  If he could say it on the strength of human calculation, then Iphigenia would surely understand him.  But that would mean that Agamemnon had not made the infinite movement of resignation, and then he would not be a hero, and then the seer’s utterance is just a traveller’s tale and the whole incident a piece of vaudeville.  So Abraham did not speak.  Only one word of his has been preserved, his only reply to Isaac, which we can take to be sufficient evidence that he had not spoken previously.  Isaac asks Abraham where the lamb is for the burnt offering.  ‘And Abraham said: My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.’ This last word of Abraham’s I shall consider here a little more closely.  If it had not occurred the whole incident would lack something.  If it had been a different word everything might dissolve in confusion.  I have often pondered on how far a tragic hero, whether suffering or action provides the consummation of his heroism, ought to have a final remark.  So far as I can see it depends on what sphere of life he belongs to, on the extent to which his life has intellectual significance, on how far his suffering or action stand in relation to spirit.  It goes without saying that at the moment of consummation the tragic hero, like anyone else, is capable of a few words, even a few appropriate words.  But the question is whether it is appropriate for him to say them.  If the significance of his life consists in an outward act, then he has nothing to say, since everything he says is essentially idle chat which can only weaken the impact he makes, while the rites of tragedy require on the contrary that he fulfil his task in silence, whether in action or suffering.  So as not to go too far afield I shall simply draw on our nearest example.  If Agamemnon himself, and not Calchas the seer, had had to draw the knife on Iphigenia he would only have demeaned himself by wanting to say a few words at the last moment.  Everyone knew the significance of his deed, the whole process of piety, pity, feeling, and tears was done with, and besides, his life had no relation to spirit, i.e.  he was not a teacher or a witness to the spirit.  If on the other hand the significance of the hero’s life tends towards spirit, the lack of a remark will weaken the impact he makes.  It is not something appropriate he should be saying, not some bit of rhetoric, but something that will convey that he is consummating himself in the decisive moment.  An intellectual tragic hero of this kind should allow himself what people often aspire to frivolously, namely having and keeping the last word.  We expect of him the same exalted bearing as becomes any tragic hero, but on top of that we expect some word.  So if an intellectual tragic hero consummates his heroism in suffering (in death), in this final word he will become immortal before he dies, while the ordinary tragic hero only becomes immortal after his death.  Socrates can be used as an example.  He was an intellectual tragic hero.  He hears his death-sentence.  That instant he dies.  Unless you grasp that it requires all the strength of spirit to die, that the hero always dies before his death, you will not come particularly far in your observations on life.  So as a hero Socrates is required to stay calm and at ease, but as an intellectual hero he is required to have sufficient spiritual strength at the final moment to fulfil himself.  So he cannot, like the ordinary tragic hero, concentrate on keeping himself face to face with death; he has to make this latter movement so quickly that in the same instant he is consciously above that conflict and continues to assert himself.  Had Socrates been silent in the crisis of death he would have weakened the effect of his life, aroused a suspicion that the resilience of irony was not, in him, a primitive strength, but only a game whose flexibility he had to exploit in the decisive moment, according to an opposite standard, pathetically to sustain himself.  14 What I have been briefly hinting at here doesn’t really apply to Abraham, to the extent that one supposes one might find by analogy some appropriate word for Abraham; but it applies to the extent that one sees the necessity of Abraham’s fulfilling himself at the final moment not by drawing the knife silently but by having something to say, seeing that as the father of faith he has absolute significance in terms of spirit.  As to what he is to say, I can form no idea in advance.  Once he has said it I can no doubt understand it, even in a sense understand Abraham in what is said, yet without thereby coming any nearer him than in the foregoing.  If we’d had no remark from Socrates I could have put myself into his position and made one, and if I couldn’t do that myself, a poet would have managed.  But no poet can reach Abraham.  Before going on to consider Abraham’s last word more closely, I must first draw attention to the difficulty of Abraham’s coming to say anything at all.  The distress and anguish in the paradox consisted, as explained above, precisely in the silence; Abraham cannot speak.  15 To that extent then it is self-contradictory to demand that he should speak, unless one wants him out of the paradox again, so that in the decisive moment he suspends it, whereby he ceases to be Abraham and brings to naught all that went before.  Were Abraham, at the decisive moment, to say to Isaac, ‘It is you who are to be sacrificed’, this would only be a weakness.  For if he could speak at all he should have done so long before, and the weakness then consists in his not having the maturity of spirit and concentration to imagine the whole of the pain beforehand but having pushed some of it aside so that the actual pain proves greater than the imagined one.  Besides, with talk of this kind he would fall out of the paradox, and if he really wanted to talk to Isaac he would have to transform his own situation into that of a temptation.  Otherwise, after all, he could say nothing and if he does so transform his situation he isn’t even a tragic hero.  Nevertheless a last word of Abraham’s has been preserved, and so far as I can understand the paradox I can also understand Abraham’s total presence in that word.  First and foremost he doesn’t say anything, and that is his way of saying what he has to say.  His answer to Isaac has the form of irony, for it is always irony to say something and yet not say it.  Isaac asks Abraham because he assumes Abraham knows.  Now if Abraham had replied, ‘I know nothing’, he would have uttered an untruth.  He cannot say anything, since what he knows he cannot say.  So he replies, ‘My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering.’ Here one sees the double movement in Abraham’s soul, as it has been described in the foregoing.  Had Abraham simply renounced his claim to Isaac and done no more, he would have uttered an untruth.  He knows that God demands the sacrifice of Isaac, and he knows that precisely at this moment he himself is ready to sacrifice him.  So, after having made this movement Abraham has at every instant been performing the next, making the movement on the strength of the absurd.  To that extent he utters no untruth, for on the strength of the absurd it is after all possible that God might do something quite different.  He utters no untruth then, but neither does he say anything, for he speaks in a foreign tongue.  This becomes still more obvious when we consider that it was Abraham himself who was to sacrifice Isaac.  If the task had been a different one, if the Lord had commanded Abraham to take Isaac out on the mountain in Moriah, and then let his own lightning strike Isaac and take him as a sacrifice in that way, Abraham would in a straightforward sense be right to talk as enigmatically as he did, for in that case he himself could not have known what would happen.  But as the task is given to Abraham, it is he who must act, so he must know at the decisive moment what he is about to do, and accordingly must know that Isaac is to be sacrificed.  If he doesn’t definitely know that, he hasn’t made the infinite movement of resignation, in which case his words are not indeed untrue, but then at the same time he is very far from being Abraham, he is less significant than a tragic hero, he is in fact an irresolute man who can resolve to do neither one thing nor the other, and who will therefore always come to talk in riddles.  But such a Haesitator waverer is simply a parody of the knight of faith.  Here too it can appear that one can understand Abraham, but only as one understands the paradox.  For my part I can in a way understand Abraham, but I see very well that I lack the courage to speak in this way, as much as I lack the courage to act like Abraham.  But I do not at all say that what he did is inconsiderable on that account, since on the contrary it is the one and only marvel.  And what did contemporaries think of the tragic hero? That he was great, and they looked up to him.  And that noble assembly of worthies, the jury that every generation appoints to pass judgement on its predecessor, came to the same verdict.  But none could understand Abraham.  And yet think what he achieved! To remain true to his love.  But he who loves God has no need of tears, needs no admiration, and forgets his suffering in love, indeed forgets so completely that afterwards not the least hint of his pain would remain were God himself not to remember it; for God sees in secret and knows the distress and counts the tears and forgets nothing.  So either there is a paradox, that the single individual as the particular stands in an absolute relation to the absolute, or Abraham is done for.  The Ethics of Ambiguity CONCLUSION Is this kind of ethics individualistic or not? Yes, if one means by that that it accords to the individual an absolute value and that it recognizes in him alone the power of laying the foundations of his own existence.  It is individualism in the sense in which the wisdom of the ancients, the Christian ethics of salvation, and the Kantian ideal of virtue also merit this name; it is opposed to the totalitarian doctrines which raise up beyond man the mirage of Mankind.  But it is not solipsistic, since the individual is defined only by his relationship to the world and to other individuals; he exists only by transcending himself, and his freedom can be achieved only through the freedom of others.  He justifies his existence by a movement which, like freedom, springs from his heart but which leads outside of him.  This individualism does not lead to the anarchy of personal whim.  Man is free; but he finds his law in his very freedom.  First, he must assume his freedom and not flee it; he assumes it by a constructive movement: one does not exist without doing something; and also by a negative movement which rejects oppression for oneself and others.  In construction, as in rejection, it is a matter of reconquering freedom on the contingent facticity of existence, that is, of taking the given, which, at the start, is there without any reason, as something willed by man.  A conquest of this kind is never finished; the contingency remains, and, so that he may assert his will, man is even obliged to stir up in the world the outrage he does not want.  But this element of failure is a very condition of his life; one can never dream of eliminating it without immediately dreaming of death.  This does not mean that one should consent to failure, but rather one must consent to struggle against it without respite.  Yet, isn’t this battle without victory pure gullibility? It will be argued that this is only a ruse of transcendance projecting before itself a goal which constantly recedes, running after itself on an endless treadmill; to exist for Mankind is to remain where one is, and it fools itself by calling this turbulent stagnation progress; our whole ethics does nothing but encourage it in this lying enterprise since we are asking each one to confirm existence as a value for all others; isn’t it simply a matter of organizing among men a complicity which allows them to substitute a game of illusions for the given world? We have already attempted to answer mis objection.  One can formulate it only by placing himself on the grounds of an inhuman and consequently false objectivity; within Mankind men may be fooled; the word “lie” has a meaning by opposition to the truth established by men themselves, but Mankind can not fool itself completely since it is precisely Mankind which creates the criteria of true and false.  In Plato, art is mystification because there is the heaven of Ideas; but in the earthly domain all glorification of the earth is true as soon as it is realized.  Let men attach value to words, forms, colors, mathematical theorems, physical laws, and athletic prowess; let them accord value to one another in love and friendship, and the objects, the events, and the men immediately have this value; they have it absolutely.  It is possible that a man may refuse to love anything on earth; he will prove this refusal and he will carry it out by suicide.  If he lives, the reason is that, whatever he may say, there still remains in him some attachment to existence; his life will be commensurate with this attachment; it will justify itself to the extent that it genuinely justifies the world.  This justification, though open upon the entire universe through time and space, will always be finite.  Whatever one may do, one never realizes anything but a limited work, like existence itself which tries to establish itself through that work and which death also limits.  It is the assertion of our finiteness which doubtless gives the doctrine which we have just evoked its austerity and, in some eyes, its sadness.  As soon as one considers a system abstractly and theoretically, one puts himself, in effect, on the plane of the universal, thus, of the infinite.  That is why reading the Hegelian system is so comforting.  I remember having experienced a great feeling of calm on reading Hegel in the impersonal framework of the Bibliotheque Nationale in August 1940.  But once I got into the street again, into my life, out of the system, beneath a real sky, the system was no longer of any use to me: what it had offered me, under a show of the infinite, was the consolations of death; and I again wanted to live in the midst of living men.  I think that, inversely, existentialism does not offer to the reader the consolations of an abstract evasion: existentialism proposes no evasion.  On the contrary, its ethics is experienced in the truth of life, and it then appears as the only proposition of salvation which one can address to men.  Taking on its own account Descartes’ revolt against the evil genius, the pride of the thinking reed in the face of the universe which crushes him, it asserts that, despite his limits, through them, it is up to each one to fulfill his existence as an absolute.  Regardless of the staggering dimensions of the world about us, the density of our ignorance, the risks of catastrophes to come, and our individual weakness within the immense collectivity, the fact remains that we are absolutely free today if we choose to will our existence in its finiteness, a finiteness which is open on the infinite.  And in fact, any man who has known real loves, real revolts, real desires, and real will knows quite well that he has no need of any outside guarantee to be sure of his goals; their certitude comes from his own drive.  There is a very old saying which goes: “Do what you must, come what may.” That amounts to saying in a different way that the result is not external to the good will which fulfills itself in aiming at it.  If it came to be that each man did what he must, existence would be saved in each one without there being any need of dreaming of a paradise where all would be reconciled in death.  The Ethics of Ambiguity All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.  By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook onscreen.  No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.  copyright © 1948, Philosophical Library, Inc.  cover design by Angela Goddard This 2011 edition distributed by Open Road Integrated Media 180 Varick Street New York, NY 10014 The Ethics of Ambiguity INDEX Abraham, 133 Adventurer, the 58-62 , 63 Alencon point, 94 Alexandria, 76 Algeria, 101 Ambiguity, 57 , 58 , 68 , 129 , 139 , 142 , 152-154 America, 68 , 90 Anti-fascism, 154 Arabs, the, 101 Aragon, 132 Arrivisme, 59 Athens, 75 , 76 Atom, 25 Barres, 132 Bataille Georges, 70 , 126 Baudelaire, 53 Bolshevism, 45 Breton, 55 British Empire, the 98 Buchenwald, 9 , 74 , 101 Bukharin, 146 Byzantium, 75 Carolinas, the 85 Catholic Church, 132 Catholics, the 50 Cezanne, 129 Childhood, 141 , 142 Claudel, 138 Cleopatra, 147 Coimbre, 93 Comte, 116 Cortez, 59 Crevel, 54 Christ, 56 Christian charity, 135 Christian Church, 48 Christian myth, 71 Coliseum, 75 Communist Party, 48 Cromwell, 147 Dachau, 101 Descartes, 28 , 35 , 105 , 159 Don Juan, 60 , 61 Dos Passos John, 151 Dostoievsky, 15 Driev la Rochelle, 56 , 67 Egoism, 70 Elvira, 60 , 61 England, 124 Epicurean cult, 135 Ethics, 23 , 32-34 , 55 , 59 , 95 , 126 , 129 , 131 , 134 , 154 , 156 Ethics of autonomy, 33 Existentialism, 10 , 18 , 34 , 59 , 72 , 78 , 153 , 159 Fanaticism, 66 Fascism, 45 , 62 , 138 , 154 Fichte, 17 Florence, 76 France, 132 , 140 French, the 139 French Union, the 140 Future, the 115 , 116 , 118-120 , 123 , 124 , 126-128 , 130-132 , 136 , 144 Germany, 150 Germans, the 76 , 126 Gilles, 56 Giotto, 129 Girondists, the 149 Goering, 42 Goethe, 132 Greece, 124 Hegel, 8-10 , 17 , 18 , 22 , 46 , 62 , 69 , 70 , 84 , 103-105 , 112 , 116 , 117 , 122 , 153 , 158 Hegelian ethics, 104 Heidegger, 102 , 116 Hitler, 98 Hitlerians, the 103 Humanism, 21 Humanists, the 92 Husserl, 14 Hysteria, 26 Ibsen, 143 India, 150 Indians, the 60 , 61 Individualism, 156 Intelligence, 41 Isaac, 133 Italians, the 75 Italy, 31 , 61 Jew, the 103 , 144 Jouhandeau, 53 Kant, 17 , 18 , 22 , 33 , 69 , 105 , 138 Kantian moralism, 135 Kantianism, 144 Kantism, 33 Kierkegaard, 9 , 46 , 133 Koestler, 110 , 132 Korai of Athens, 130 Lawrence, 61 Lenin, 22 , 23 Lespinasse, Mademoiselle de, 66 Lyons, 150 Malaparte, 153 Marx, 18 , 20 , 21 , 84 , 85 , 87 , 118 Marxism, 18-20 Materialism, 20 Mathematics, 79 Marseilles, 92 Maurras, 85 Metaphysics, 34 Middle Ages, the 92 Montaigne, 7 Moralism, 21 Moscow trials, 146 Mythomaniac, the 47 Nazis, the 95 , 101 , 153 Nazism, 56 Nietzsche, 46 , 72 Nihilism, 64 , 56 , 58 , 65 , 68 , 100 Nihilist, the 52 , 55 , 57 , 61 Nirvana, 8 Nuremberg, 42 Obidos, 93 Palestine, 124 Paris, 76 , 125 , 150 Passion, 64 , 66 , 72 Passionate man, the 63 , 64 , 66 Paternalism, 138 Philosophy, 46 Physics, 79 Pierrefeu, 129 Pizarro, 61 Plato, 33 , 80 , 157 Pompeii, 92 Ponge, 88 , 115 Portugal, 93 Proust, 50 P.  R.  L.  (Parti Republicain de’la Liberté) 90 Protestantism, 133 Rauschning, 56 Realism, 21 Reformation, the 133 Renaissance, the 93 Revolution, 15 , 46 , 49 Robespierre, 149 Rome, 75 Roque dela, Colonel 153 Rousseau, 141 , 142 Rousset David, 114 Russia, 68 , 125 , 146 Saint-Just, 108 , 111 , 149 Salazar, 93 Sartre, 10-12 , 24 , 53 , 122 Scepticism, 58 , 59 Science, 46 Serious man, the 45-62 , 64 Sickness, 45 Signification, 31 , 41 , 71 Socialism, 154 Socrates, 33 Spain, 124 , 144 Spaniard, the 144 Sparta, 76 Spartacus, 132 Spinoza, 33 Spontaneity, 26 , 41 Stalingrad, 91 , 146 Stalinists, the 125 Steinbeck, 150-152 Stoicism, 81 Stoics, the 29 , 144 Subman, the 43-47 , 53 , 55 Surrealism, 54 Syracuse, 75 Technics, 79 , 80 Titian, 129 Tristan Flora, 86 Trotsky, 119 Tyrant, the 62 , 71 United States, 161 Universe, the 121 U.S.S.R., 145 Vache, 54 Valery, 121 Van Gogh, 29 Vichyites, the 131 Vigilantes of America, 60 War, 45 Wright Richard, 89 Yankees, the 90 The Ethics of Ambiguity “Life in itself is neither good nor evil, it is the place of good and evil, according to what you make it.” —Montaigne.  I “T HE continous work of our life,” says Montaigne, “is to build death.” He quotes the Latin poets: Prima, quae vitam dedit, hora corpsit.  And again: Nascentes morimur.  Man knows and thinks this tragic ambivalence which the animal and the plant merely undergo.  A new paradox is thereby introduced into his destiny.  “Rational animal,” “thinking reed,” he escapes from his natural condition without, however, freeing himself from it.  He is still a part of this world of which he is a consciousness.  He asserts himself as a pure internality against which no external power can take hold, and he also experiences himself as a thing crushed by the dark weight of other things.  At every moment he can grasp the non-temporal truth of his existence.  But between the past which no longer is and the future which is not yet, this moment when he exists is nothing.  This privilege, which he alone possesses, of being a sovereign and unique subject amidst a universe of objects, is what he shares with all his fellow-men.  In turn an object for others, he is nothing more than an individual in the collectivity on which he depends.  As long as there have been men and they have lived, they have all felt this tragic ambiguity of their condition, but as long as there have been philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it.  They have striven to reduce mind to matter, or to reabsorb matter into mind, or to merge them within a single substance.  Those who have accepted the dualism have established a hierarchy between body and soul which permits of considering as negligible the part of the self which cannot be saved.  They have denied death, either by integrating it with life or by promising to man immortality.  Or, again they have denied life, considering it as a veil of illusion beneath which is hidden the truth of Nirvana.  And the ethics which they have proposed to their disciples has always pursued the same goal.  It has been a matter of eliminating the ambiguity by making oneself pure inwardness or pure externality, by escaping from the sensible world or by being engulfed in it, by yielding to eternity or enclosing oneself in the pure moment.  Hegel, with more ingenuity, tried to reject none of the aspects of man’s condition and to reconcile them all.  According to his system, the moment is preserved in the development of time; Nature asserts itself in the face of Spirit which denies it while assuming it; the individual is again found in the collectivity within which he is lost; and each man’s death is fulfilled by being canceled out into the Life of Mankind.  One can thus repose in a marvelous optimism where even the bloody wars simply express the fertile restlessness of the Spirit.  At the present time there still exist many doctrines which choose to leave in the shadow certain troubling aspects of a too complex situation.  But their attempt to lie to us is in vain.  Cowardice doesn’t pay.  Those reasonable metaphysics, those consoling ethics with which they would like to entice us only accentuate the disorder from which we suffer.  Men of today seem to feel more acutely than ever the paradox of their condition.  They know themselves to be the supreme end to which all action should be subordinated, but the exigencies of action force them to treat one another as instruments or obstacles, as means.  The more widespread their mastery of the world, the more they find themselves crushed by uncontrollable forces.  Though they are masters of the atomic bomb, yet it is created only to destroy them.  Each one has the incomparable taste in his mouth of his own life, and yet each feels himself more insignificant than an insect within the immense collectivity whose limits are one with the earth’s.  Perhaps in no other age have they manifested their grandeur more brilliantly, and in no other age has this grandeur been so horribly flouted.  In spite of so many stubborn lies, at every moment, at every opportunity, the truth comes to light, the truth of life and death, of my solitude and my bond with the world, of my freedom and my servitude, of the insignificance and the sovereign importance of each man and all men.  There was Stalingrad and there was Buchenwald, and neither of the two wipes out the other.  Since we do not succeed in fleeing it, let us therefore try to look the truth in the face.  Let us try to assume our fundamental ambiguity.  It is in the knowledge of the genuine conditions of our life that we must draw our strength to live and our reason for acting.  From the very beginning, existentialism defined itself as a philosophy of ambiguity.  It was by affirming the irreducible character of ambiguity that Kierkegaard opposed himself to Hegel, and it is by ambiguity that, in our own generation, Sartre, in Being and Nothingness, fundamentally defined man, that being whose being is not to be, that subjectivity which realizes itself only as a presence in the world, that engaged freedom, that surging of the for-oneself which is immediately given for others.  But it is also claimed that existentialism is a philosophy of the absurd and of despair.  It encloses man in a sterile anguish, in an empty subjectivity.  It is incapable of furnishing him with any principle for making choices.  Let him do as he pleases.  In any case, the game is lost.  Does not Sartre declare, in effect, that man is a “useless passion,” that he tries in vain to realize the synthesis of the for-oneself and the in-oneself, to make himself God? It is true.  But it is also true that the most optimistic ethics have all begun by emphasizing the element of failure involved in the condition of man; without failure, no ethics; for a being who, from the very start, would be an exact co-incidence with himself, in a perfect plenitude, the notion of having-to-be would have no meaning.  One does not offer an ethics to a God.  It is impossible to propose any to man if one defines him as nature, as something given.  The so-called psychological or empirical ethics manage to establish themselves only by introducing surreptitiously some flaw within the manthing which they have first defined.  Hegel tells us in the last part of The Phenomenology of Mind that moral consciousness can exist only to the extent that there is disagreement between nature and morality.  It would disappear if the ethical law became the natural law.  To such an extent that by a paradoxical “displacement,” if moral action is the absolute goal, the absolute goal is also that moral action may not be present.  This means that there can be a having-to-be only for a being who, according to the existentialist definition, questions himself in his being, a being who is at a distance from himself and who has to be his being.  Well and good.  But it is still necessary for the failure to be surmounted, and existentialist ontology does not allow this hope.  Man’s passion is useless; he has no means for becoming the being that he is not.  That too is true.  And it is also true that in Being and Nothingness Sartre has insisted above all on the abortive aspect of the human adventure.  It is only in the last pages that he opens up the perspective for an ethics.  However, if we reflect upon his descriptions of existence, we perceive that they are far from condemning man without recourse.  The failure described in Being and Nothingness is definitive, but it is also ambiguous.  Man, Sartre tells us, is “a being who makes himself a lack of being in order that there might be being.” That means, first of all, that his passion is not inflicted upon him from without.  He chooses it.  It is his very being and, as such, does not imply the idea of unhappiness.  If this choice is considered as useless, it is because there exists no absolute value before the passion of man, outside of it, in relation to which one might distinguish the useless from the useful.  The word “useful” has not yet received a meaning on the level of description where Being and Nothingness is situated.  It can be defined only in the human world established by man’s projects and the ends he sets up.  In the original helplessness from which man surges up, nothing is useful, nothing is useless.  It must therefore be understood that the passion to which man has acquiesced finds no external justification.  No outside appeal, no objective necessity permits of its being called useful.  It has no reason to will itself.  But this does not mean that it can not justify itself, that it can not give itself reasons for being that it does not have.  And indeed Sartre tells us that man makes himself this lack of being in order that there might be being.  The term in order that clearly indicates an intentionality.  It is not in vain that man nullifies being.  Thanks to him, being is disclosed and he desires this disclosure.  There is an original type of attachment to being which is not the relationship “wanting to be” but rather “wanting to disclose being.” Now, here there is not failure, but rather success.  This end, which man proposes to himself by making himself lack of being, is, in effect, realized by him.  By uprooting himself from the world, man makes himself present to the world and makes the world present to him.  I should like to be the landscape which I am contemplating, I should like this sky, this quiet water to think themselves within me, that it might be I whom they express in flesh and bone, and I remain at a distance.  But it is also by this distance that the sky and the water exist before me.  My contemplation is an excruciation only because it is also a joy.  I can not appropriate the snow field where I slide.  It remains foreign, forbidden, but I take delight in this very effort toward an impossible possession.  I experience it as a triumph, not as a defeat.  This means that man, in his vain attempt to be God, makes himself exist as man, and if he is satisfied with this existence, he coincides exactly with himself.  It is not granted him to exist without tending toward this being which he will never be.  But it is possible for him to want this tension even with the failure which it involves.  His being is lack of being, but this lack has a way of being which is precisely existence.  In Hegelian terms it might be said that we have here a negation of the negation by which the positive is re-established.  Man makes himself a lack, but he can deny the lack as lack and affirm himself as a positive existence.  He then assumes the failure.  And the condemned action, insofar as it is an effort to be, finds its validity insofar as it is a manifestation of existence.  However, rather than being a Hegelian act of surpassing, it is a matter of a conversion.  For in Hegel the surpassed terms are preserved only as abstract moments, whereas we consider that existence still remains a negativity in the positive affirmation of itself.  And it does not appear, in its turn, as the term of a further synthesis.  The failure is not surpassed, but assumed.  Existence asserts itself as an absolute which must seek its justification within itself and not suppress itself, even though it may be lost by preserving itself.  To attain his truth, man must not attempt to dispel the ambiguity of his being but, on the contrary, accept the task of realizing it.  He rejoins himself only to the extent that he agrees to remain at a distance from himself.  This conversion is sharply distinguished from the Stoic conversion in that it does not claim to oppose to the sensible universe a formal freedom which is without content.  To exist genuinely is not to deny this spontaneous movement of my transcendence, but only to refuse to lose myself in it.  Existentialist conversion should rather be compared to Husserlian reduction: let man put his will to be “in parentheses” and he will thereby be brought to the consciousness of his true condition.  And just as phenomenological reduction prevents the errors of dogmatism by suspending all affirmation concerning the mode of reality of the external world, whose flesh and bone presence the reduction does not, however, contest, so existentialist conversion does not suppress my instincts, desires, plans, and passions.  It merely prevents any possibility of failure by refusing to set up as absolutes the ends toward which my transcendence thrusts itself, and by considering them in their connection with the freedom which projects them.  The first implication of such an attitude is that the genuine man will not agree to recognize any foreign absolute.  When a man projects into an ideal heaven that impossible synthesis of the for-itself and the in-itself that is called God, it is because he wishes the regard of this existing Being to change his existence into being; but if he agrees not to be in order to exist genuinely, he will abandon the dream of an inhuman objectivity.  He will understand that it is not a matter of being right in the eyes of a God, but of being right in his own eyes.  Renouncing the thought of seeking the guarantee for his existence outside of himself, he will also refuse to believe in unconditioned values which would set themselves up athwart his freedom like things.  Value is this lacking-being of which freedom makes itself a lack; and it is because the latter makes itself a lack that value appears.  It is desire which creates the desirable, and the project which sets up the end.  It is human existence which makes values spring up in the world on the basis of which it will be able to judge the enterprise in which it will be engaged.  But first it locates itself beyond any pessimism, as beyond any optimism, for the fact of its original springing forth is a pure contingency.  Before existence there is no more reason to exist than not to exist.  The lack of existence can not be evaluated since it is the fact on the basis of which all evaluation is defined.  It can not be compared to anything for there is nothing outside of it to serve as a term of comparison.  This rejection of any extrinsic justification also confirms the rejection of an original pessimism which we posited at the beginning.  Since it is unjustifiable from without, to declare from without that it is unjustifiable is not to condemn it.  And the truth is that outside of existence there is nobody.  Man exists.  For him it is not a question of wondering whether his presence in the world is useful, whether life is worth the trouble of being lived.  These questions make no sense.  It is a matter of knowing whether he wants to live and under what conditions.  But if man is free to define for himself the conditions of a life which is valid in his own eyes, can he not choose whatever he likes and act however he likes? Dostoievsky asserted, “If God does not exist, everything is permitted.” Today’s believers use this formula for their own advantage.  To re-establish man at the heart of his destiny is, they claim, to repudiate all ethics.  However, far from God’s absence authorizing all license, the contrary is the case, because man is abandoned on the earth, because his acts are definitive, absolute engagements.  He bears the responsibility for a world which is not the work of a strange power, but of himself, where his defeats are inscribed, and his victories as well.  A God can pardon, efface, and compensate.  But if God does not exist, man’s faults are inexpiable.  If it is claimed that, whatever the case may be, this earthly stake has no importance, this is precisely because one invokes that inhuman objectivity which we declined at the start.  One can not start by saying that our earthly destiny has or has not importance, for it depends upon us to give it importance.  It is up to man to make it important to be a man, and he alone can feel his success or failure.  And if it is again said that nothing forces him to try to justify his being in this way, then one is playing upon the notion of freedom in a dishonest way.  The believer is also free to sin.  The divine law is imposed upon him only from the moment he decides to save his soul.  In the Christian religion, though one speaks very little about them today, there are also the damned.  Thus, on the earthly plane, a life which does not seek to ground itself will be a pure contingency.  But it is permitted to wish to give itself a meaning and a truth, and it then meets rigorous demands within its own heart.  However, even among the proponents of secular ethics, there are many who charge existentialism with offering no objective content to the moral act.  It is said that this philosophy is subjective, even solipsistic.  If he is once enclosed within himself, how can man get out? But there too we have a great deal of dishonesty.  It is rather well known that the fact of being a subject is a universal fact and that the Cartesian cogito expresses both the most individual experience and the most objective truth.  By affirming that the source of all values resides in the freedom of man, existentialism merely carries on the tradition of Kant, Fichte, and Hegel, who, in the words of Hegel himself, “have taken for their point of departure the principle according to which the essence of right and duty and the essence of the thinking and willing subject are absolutely identical.” The idea that defines all humanism is that the world is not a given world, foreign to man, one to which he has to force himself to yield from without.  It is the world willed by man, insofar as his will expresses his genuine reality.  Some will answer, “All well and good.  But Kant escapes solipsism because for him genuine reality is the human person insofar as it transcends its empirical embodiment and chooses to be universal.” And doubtless Hegel asserted that the “right of individuals to their particularity is equally contained in ethical substantiality, since particularity is the extreme, phenomenal modality in which moral reality exists ( Philosophy of Right, § 154).” But for him particularity appears only as a moment of the totality in which it must surpass itself.  Whereas for existentialism, it is not impersonal universal man who is the source of values, but the plurality of concrete, particular men projecting themselves toward their ends on the basis of situations whose particularity is as radical and as irreducible as subjectivity itself.  How could men, originally separated, get together? And, indeed, we are coming to the real situation of the problem.  But to state it is not to demonstrate that it can not be resolved.  On the contrary, we must here again invoke the notion of Hegelian “displacement.” There is an ethics only if there is a problem to solve.  And it can be said, by inverting the preceding line of argument, that the ethics which have given solutions by effacing the fact of the separation of men are not valid precisely because there is this separation.  An ethics of ambiguity will be one which will refuse to deny a priori that separate existants can, at the same time, be bound to each other, that their individual freedoms can forge laws valid for all.  Before undertaking the quest for a solution, it is interesting to note that the notion of situation and the recognition of separation which it implies are not peculiar to existentialism.  We also meet it in Marxism which, from one point of view, can be considered as an apotheosis of subjectivity.  Like all radical humanism, Marxism rejects the idea of an inhuman objectivity and locates itself in the tradition of Kant and Hegel.  Unlike the old kind of Utopian socialism which confronted earthly order with the archetypes of Justice, Order, and Good, Marx does not consider that certain human situations are, in themselves and absolutely, preferable to others.  It is the needs of people, the revolt of a class, which define aims and goals.  It is from within a rejected situation, in the light of this rejection, that a new state appears as desirable; only the will of men decides; and it is on the basis of a certain individual act of rooting itself in the historical and economic world that this will thrusts itself toward the future and then chooses a perspective where such words as goal, progress, efficacy, success, failure, action, adversaries, instruments, and obstacles, have a meaning.  Then certain acts can be regarded as good and others as bad.  In order for the universe of revolutionary values to arise, a subjective movement must create them in revolt and hope.  And this movement appears so essential to Marxists that if an intellectual or a bourgeois also claims to want revolution, they distrust him.  They think that it is only from the outside, by abstract recognition, that the bourgeois intellectual can adhere to these values which he himself has not set up.  Regardless of what he does, his situation makes it impossible for the ends pursued by proletarians to be absolutely his ends too, since it is not the very impulse of his life which has begotten them.  However, in Marxism, if it is true that the goal and the meaning of action are defined by human wills, these wills do not appear as free.  They are the reflection of objective conditions by which the situation of the class or the people under consideration is defined.  In the present moment of the development of capitalism, the proletariat can not help wanting its elimination as a class.  Subjectivity is re-absorbed into the objectivity of the given world.  Revolt, need, hope, rejection, and desire are only the resultants of external forces.  The psychology of behavior endeavors to explain this alchemy.  It is known that that is the essential point on which existentialist ontology is opposed to dialectical materialism.  We think that the meaning of the situation does not impose itself on the consciousness of a passive subject, that it surges up only by the disclosure which a free subject effects in his project.  It appears evident to us that in order to adhere to Marxism, to enroll in a party, and in one rather than another, to be actively attached to it, even a Marxist needs a decision whose source is only in himself.  And this autonomy is not the privilege (or the defect) of the intellectual or the bourgeois.  The proletariat, taken as a whole, as a class, can become conscious of its situation in more than one way.  It can want the revolution to be brought about by one party or another.  It can let itself be lured on, as happened to the German proletariat, or can sleep in the dull comfort which capitalism grants it, as does the American proletariat.  It may be said that in all these cases it is betraying; still, it must be free to betray.  Or, if one pretends to distinguish the real proletariat from a treacherous proletariat, or a misguided or unconscious or mystified one, then it is no longer a flesh and blood proletariat that one is dealing with, but the idea of a proletariat, one of those ideas which Marx ridiculed.  Besides, in practice, Marxism does not always deny freedom.  The very notion of action would lose all meaning if history were a mechanical unrolling in which man appears only as a passive conductor of outside forces.  By acting, as also by preaching action, the Marxist revolutionary asserts himself as a veritable agent; he assumes himself to be free.  And it is even curious to note that most Marxists of today — unlike Marx himself — feel no repugnance at the edifying dullness of moralizing speeches.  They do not limit themselves to finding fault with their adversaries in the name of historical realism.  When they tax them with cowardice, lying, selfishness, and venality, they very well mean to condemn them in the name of a moralism superior to history.  Likewise, in the eulogies which they bestow upon each other they exalt the eternal virtues, courage, abnegation, lucidity, integrity.  It may be said that all these words are used for propagandistic purposes, that it is only a matter of expedient language.  But this is to admit that this language is heard, that it awakens an echo in the hearts of those to whom it is addressed.  Now, neither scorn nor esteem would have any meaning if one regarded the acts of a man as a purely mechanical resultant.  In order for men to become indignant or to admire, they must be conscious of their own freedom and the freedom of others.  Thus, everything occurs within each man and in the collective tactics as if men were free.  But then what revelation can a coherent humanism hope to oppose to the testimony which man brings to bear upon himself? So Marxists often find themselves having to confirm this belief in freedom, even if they have to reconcile it with determination as well as they can.  However, while this concession is wrested from them by the very practice of action, it is in the name of action that they attempt to condemn a philosophy of freedom.  They declare authoritatively that the existence of freedom would make any concerted enterprise impossible.  According to them, if the individual were not constrained by the external world to want this rather than that, there would be nothing to defend him against his whims.  Here, in different language, we again meet the charge formulated by the respectful believer of supernatural imperatives.  In the eyes of the Marxist, as of the Christian, it seems that to act freely is to give up justifying one’s acts.  This is a curious reversal of the Kantian “you must; therefore, you can.” Kant postulates freedom in the name of morality.  The Marxist, on the contrary, declares, “You must; therefore, you can not.” To him a man’s action seems valid only if the man has not helped set it going by an internal movement.  To admit the ontological possibility of a choice is already to betray the Cause.  Does this mean that the revolutionary attitude in any way gives up being a moral attitude? It would be logical, since we observed with Hegel that it is only insofar as the choice is not realized at first that it can be set up as a moral choice.  But here again Marxist thought hesitates.  It sneers at idealistic ethics which do not bite into the world; but its scoffing signifies that there can be no ethics outside of action, not that action lowers itself to the level of a simple natural process.  It is quite evident that the revolutionary enterprise has a human meaning.  Lenin’s remark, which says, in substance, “I call any action useful to the party moral action; I call it immoral if it is harmful to the party,” cuts two ways.  On the one hand, he refuses to accept outdated values, but he also sees in political operation a total manifestation of man as having-to-be at the same time as being.  Lenin refuses to set up ethics abstractly because he means to realize it effectively.  And yet a moral idea is present in the words, writings, and acts of Marxists.  It is contradictory, then, to reject with horror the moment of choice which is precisely the moment when spirit passes into nature, the moment of the concrete fulfillment of man and morality.  As for us, whatever the case may be, we believe in freedom.  Is it true that this belief must lead us to despair? Must we grant this curious paradox: that from the moment a man recognizes himself as free, he is prohibited from wishing for anything? On the contrary, it appears to us that by turning toward this freedom we are going to discover a principle of action whose range will be universal.  The characteristic feature of all ethics is to consider human life as a game that can be won or lost and to teach man the means of winning.  Now, we have seen that the original scheme of man is ambiguous: he wants to be, and to the extent that he coincides with this wish, he fails.  All the plans in which this will to be is actualized are condemned; and the ends circumscribed by these plans remain mirages.  Human transcendence is vainly engulfed in those miscarried attempts.  But man also wills himself to be a disclosure of being, and if he coincides with this wish, he wins, for the fact is that the world becomes present by his presence in it.  But the disclosure implies a perpetual tension to keep being at a certain distance, to tear oneself from the world, and to assert oneself as a freedom.  To wish for the disclosure of the world and to assert oneself as freedom are one and the same movement.  Freedom is the source from which all significations and all values spring.  It is the original condition of all justification of existence.  The man who seeks to justify his life must want freedom itself absolutely and above everything else.  At the same time that it requires the realization of concrete ends, of particular projects, it requires itself universally.  It is not a ready-made value which offers itself from the outside to my abstract adherence, but it appears (not on the plane of facility, but on the moral plane) as a cause of itself.  It is necessarily summoned up by the values which it sets up and through which it sets itself up.  It can not establish a denial of itself, for in denying itself, it would deny the possibility of any foundation.  To will oneself moral and to will oneself free are one and the same decision.  It seems that the Hegelian notion of “displacement” which we relied on a little while ago is now turning against us.  There is ethics only if ethical action is not present.  Now, Sartre declares that every man is free, that there is no way of his not being free.  When he wants to escape his destiny, he is still freely fleeing it.  Does not this presence of a so to speak natural freedom contradict the notion of ethical freedom? What meaning can there be in the words to will oneself free, since at the beginning we are free? It is contradictory to set freedom up as something conquered if at first it is something given.  This objection would mean something only if freedom were a thing or a quality naturally attached to a thing.  Then, in effect, one would either have it or not have it.  But the fact is that it merges with the very movement of this ambiguous reality which is called existence and which is only by making itself be; to such an extent that it is precisely only by having to be conquered that it gives itself.  To will oneself free is to effect the transition from nature to morality by establishing a genuine freedom on the original upsurge of our existence.  Every man is originally free, in the sense that he spontaneously casts himself into the world.  But if we consider this spontaneity in its facticity, it appears to us only as a pure contingency, an upsurging as stupid as the clinamen of the Epicurean atom which turned up at any moment whatsoever from any direction whatsoever.  And it was quite necessary for the atom to arrive somewhere.  But its movement was not justified by this result which had not been chosen.  It remained absurd.  Thus, human spontaneity always projects itself toward something.  The psychoanalyst discovers a meaning even in abortive acts and attacks of hysteria.  But in order for this meaning to justify the transcendence which discloses it, it must itself be founded, which it will never be if I do not choose to found it myself.  Now, I can evade this choice.  We have said that it would be contradictory deliberately to will oneself not free.  But one can choose not to will himself free.  In laziness, heedlessness, capriciousness, cowardice, impatience, one contests the meaning of the project at the very moment that one defines it.  The spontaneity of the subject is then merely a vain living palpitation, its movement toward the object is a flight, and itself is an absence.  To convert the absence into presence, to convert my flight into will, I must assume my project positively.  It is not a matter of retiring into the completely inner and, moreover, abstract movement of a given spontaneity, but of adhering to the concrete and particular movement by which this spontaneity defines itself by thrusting itself toward an end.  It is through this end that it sets up that my spontaneity confirms itself by reflecting upon itself.  Then, by a single movement, my will, establishing the content of the act, is legitimized by it.  I realize my escape toward the other as a freedom when, assuming the presence of the object, I thereby assume myself before it as a presence.  But this justification requires a constant tension.  My project is never founded; it founds itself.  To avoid the anguish of this permanent choice, one may attempt to flee into the object itself, to engulf one’s own presence in it.  In the servitude of the serious, the original spontaneity strives to deny itself.  It strives in vain, and meanwhile it then fails to fulfill itself as moral freedom.  We have just described only the subjective and formal aspect of this freedom.  But we also ought to ask ourselves whether one can will oneself free in any matter, whatsoever it may be.  It must first be observed that this will is developed in the course of time.  It is in time that the goal is pursued and that freedom confirms itself.  And this assumes that it is realized as a unity in the unfolding of time.  One escapes the absurdity of the clinamen only by escaping the absurdity of the pure moment.  An existence would be unable to found itself if moment by moment it crumbled into nothingness.  That is why no moral question presents itself to the child as long as he is still incapable of recognizing himself in the past or seeing himself in the future.  It is only when the moments of his life begin to be organized into behaviour that he can decide and choose.  The value of the chosen end is confirmed and, reciprocally, the genuineness of the choice is manifested concretely through patience, courage, and fidelity.  If I leave behind an act which I have accomplished, it becomes a thing by falling into the past.  It is no longer anything but a stupid and opaque fact.  In order to prevent this metamorphosis, I must ceaselessly return to it and justify it in the unity of the project in which I am engaged.  Setting up the movement of my transcendence requires that I never let it uselessly fall back upon itself, that I prolong it indefinitely.  Thus I can not genuinely desire an end today without desiring it through my whole existence, insofar as it is the future of this present moment and insofar as it is the surpassed past of days to come.  To will is to engage myself to persevere in my will.  This does not mean that I ought not aim at any limited end.  I may desire absolutely and forever a revelation of a moment.  This means that the value of this provisional end will be confirmed indefinitely.  But this living confirmation can not be merely contemplative and verbal.  It is carried out in an act.  The goal toward which I surpass myself must appear to me as a point of departure toward a new act of surpassing.  Thus, a creative freedom develops happily without ever congealing into unjustified facticity.  The creator leans upon anterior creations in order to create the possibility of new creations.  His present project embraces the past and places confidence in the freedom to come, a confidence which is never disappointed.  It discloses being at the end of a further disclosure.  At each moment freedom is confirmed through all creation.  However, man does not create the world.  He succeeds in disclosing it only through the resistance which the world opposes to him.  The will is defined only by raising obstacles, and by the contingency of facticity certain obstacles let themselves be conquered, and others do not.  This is what Descartes expressed when he said that the freedom of man is infinite, but his power is limited.  How can the presence of these limits be reconciled with the idea of a freedom confirmimg itself as a unity and an indefinite movement? In the face of an obstacle which it is impossible to overcome, stubbornness is stupid.  If I persist in beating my fist against a stone wall, my freedom exhausts itself in this useless gesture without succeeding in giving itself a content.  It debases itself in a vain contingency.  Yet, there is hardly a sadder virtue than resignation.  It transforms into phantoms and contingent reveries projects which had at the beginning been set up as will and freedom.  A young man has hoped for a happy or useful or glorious life.  If the man he has become looks upon these miscarried attempts of his adolescence with disillusioned indifference, there they are, forever frozen in the dead past.  When an effort fails, one declares bitterly that he has lost time and wasted his powers.  The failure condemns that whole part of ourselves which we had engaged in the effort.  It was to escape this dilemma that the Stoics preached indifference.  We could indeed assert our freedom against all constraint if we agreed to renounce the particularity of our projects.  If a door refuses to open, let us accept not opening it and there we are free.  But by doing that, one manages only to save an abstract notion of freedom.  It is emptied of all content and all truth.  The power of man ceases to be limited because it is annulled.  It is the particularity of the project which determines the limitation of the power, but it is also what gives the project its content and permits it to be set up.  There are people who are filled with such horror at the idea of a defeat that they keep themselves from ever doing anything.  But no one would dream of considering this gloomy passivity as the triumph of freedom.  The truth is that in order for my freedom not to risk coming to grief against the obstacle which its very engagement has raised, in order that it might still pursue its movement in the face of the failure, it must, by giving itself a particular content, aim by means of it at an end which is nothing else but precisely the free movement of existence.  Popular opinion is quite right in admiring a man who, having been ruined or having suffered an accident, knows how to gain the upper hand, that is, renew his engagement in the world, thereby strongly asserting the independence of freedom in relation to thing.  Thus, when the sick Van Gogh calmly accepted the prospect of a future in which he would be unable to paint any more, there was no sterile resignation.  For him painting was a personal way of life and of communication with others which in another form could be continued even in an asylum.  The past will be integrated and freedom will be confirmed in a renunciation of this kind.  It will be lived in both heartbreak and joy.  In heartbreak, because the project is then robbed of its particularity — it sacrifices its flesh and blood.  But in joy, since at the moment one releases his hold, he again finds his hands free and ready to stretch out toward a new future.  But this act of passing beyond is conceivable only if what the content has in view is not to bar up the future, but, on the contrary, to plan new possibilities.  This brings us back by another route to what we had already indicated.  My freedom must not seek to trap being but to disclose it.  The disclosure is the transition from being to existence.  The goal which my freedom aims at is conquering existence across the always inadequate density of being.  However, such salvation is only possible if, despite obstacles and failures, a man preserves the disposal of his future, if the situation opens up more possibilities to him.  In case his transcendence is cut off from his goal or there is no longer any hold on objects which might give it a valid content, his spontaneity is dissipated without founding anything.  Then he may not justify his existence positively and he feels its contingency with wretched disgust.  There is no more obnoxious way to punish a man than to force him to perform acts which make no sense to him, as when one empties and fills the same ditch indefinitely, when one makes soldiers who are being punished march up and down, or when one forces a schoolboy to copy lines.  Revolts broke out in Italy in September 1946 because the unemployed were set to breaking pebbles which served no purpose whatever.  As is well known, this was also the weakness which ruined the national workshops in 1848.  This mystification of useless effort is more intolerable than fatigue.  Life imprisonment is the most horrible of punishments because it preserves existence in its pure facticity but forbids it all legitimation.  A freedom can not will itself without willing itself as an indefinite movement.  It must absolutely reject the constraints which arrest its drive toward itself.  This rejection takes on a positive aspect when the constraint is natural.  One rejects the illness by curing it.  But it again assumes the negative aspect of revolt when the oppressor is a human freedom.  One can not deny being: the in-itself is, and negation has no hold over this being, this pure positivity; one does not escape this fullness: a destroyed house is a ruin; a broken chain is scrap iron: one attains only signification and, through it, the for-itself which is projected there; the for-itself carries nothingness in its heart and can be annihilated, whether in the very upsurge of its existence or through the world in which it exists.  The prison is repudiated as such when the prisoner escapes.  But revolt, insofar as it is pure negative movement, remains abstract.  It is fulfilled as freedom only by returning to the positive, that is, by giving itself a content through action, escape, political struggle, revolution.  Human transcendence then seeks, with the destruction of the given situation, the whole future which will flow from its victory.  It resumes its indefinite rapport with itself.  There are limited situations where this return to the positive is impossible, where the future is radically blocked off.  Revolt can then be achieved only in the definitive rejection of the imposed situation, in suicide.  It can be seen that, on the one hand, freedom can always save itself, for it is realized as a disclosure of existence through its very failures, and it can again confirm itself by a death freely chosen.  But, on the other hand, the situations which it discloses through its project toward itself do not appear as equivalents.  It regards as privileged situations those which permit it to realize itself as indefinite movement; that is, it wishes to pass beyond everything which limits its power; and yet, this power is always limited.  Thus, just as life is identified with the will-to-live, freedom always appears as a movement of liberation.  It is only by prolonging itself through the freedom of others that it manages to surpass death itself and to realize itself as an indefinite unity.  Later on we shall see what problems such a relationship raises.  For the time being it is enough for us to have established the fact that the words “to will oneself free” have a positive and concrete meaning.  If man wishes to save his existence, as only he himself can do, his original spontaneity must be raised to the height of moral freedom by taking itself as an end through the disclosure of a particular content.  But a new question is immediately raised.  If man has one and only one way to save his existence, how can he choose not to choose it in all cases? How is a bad willing possible? We meet with this problem in all ethics, since it is precisely the possibility of a perverted willing which gives a meaning to the idea of virtue.  We know the answer of Socrates, of Plato, of Spinoza: “No one is willfully bad.” And if Good is a transcendent thing which is more or less foreign to man, one imagines that the mistake can be explained by error.  But if one grants that the moral world is the world genuinely willed by man, all possibility of error is eliminated.  Moreover, in Kantian ethics, which is at the origin of all ethics of autonomy, it is very difficult to account for an evil will.  As the choice of his character which the subject makes is achieved in the intelligible world by a purely rational will, one can not understand how the latter expressly rejects the law which it gives to itself.  But this is because Kantism defined man as a pure positivity, and it therefore recognized no other possibility in him than coincidence with himself.  We, too, define morality by this adhesion to the self; and this is why we say that man can not positively decide between the negation and the assumption of his freedom, for as soon as he decides, he assumes it.  He can not positively will not to be free for such a willing would be self-destructive.  Only, unlike Kant, we do not see man as being essentially a positive will.  On the contrary, he is first defined as a negativity.  He is first at a distance from himself.  He can coincide with himself only by agreeing never to rejoin himself.  There is within him a perpetual playing with the negative, and he thereby escapes himself, he escapes his freedom.  And it is precisely because an evil will is here possible that the words “to will oneself free” have a meaning.  Therefore, not only do we assert that the existentialist doctrine permits the elaboration of an ethics, but it even appears to us as the only philosophy in which an ethics has its place.  For, in a metaphysics of transcendence, in the classical sense of the term, evil is reduced to error; and in humanistic philosophies it is impossible to account for it, man being defined as complete in a complete world.  Existentialism alone gives — like religions — a real role to evil, and it is this, perhaps, which make its judgments so gloomy.  Men do not like to feel themselves in danger.  Yet, it is because there are real dangers, real failures and real earthly damnation that words like victory, wisdom, or joy have meaning.  Nothing is decided in advance, and it is because man has something to lose and because he can lose that he can also win.  Therefore, in the very condition of man there enters the possibility of not fulfilling this condition.  In order to fulfill it he must assume himself as a being who “makes himself a lack of being so that there might be being.” But the trick of dishonesty permits stopping at any moment whatsoever.  One may hesitate to make oneself a lack of being, one may withdraw before existence, or one may falsely assert oneself as being, or assert oneself as nothingness.  One may realize his freedom only as an abstract independence, or, on the contrary, reject with despair the distance which separates us from being.  All errors are possible since man is a negativity, and they are motivated by the anguish he feels in the face of his freedom.  Concretely, men slide incoherently from one attitude to another.  We shall limit ourselves to describing in their abstract form those which we have just indicated.  The Ethics of Ambiguity TABLE OF CONTENTS I Ambiguity and Freedom II Personal Freedom and Others III The Positive Aspect of Ambiguity 1.  The Aesthetic Attitude 2.  Freedom and Liberation 3.  The Antinomies of Action 4.  The Present and the Future 5.  Ambiguity Conclusion Index Cover The Ethics of Ambiguity II Man’s unhappiness, says Descartes, is due to his having first been a child.  And indeed the unfortunate choices which most men make can only be explained by the fact that they have taken place on the basis of childhood.  The child’s situation is characterized by his finding himself cast into a universe which he has not helped to establish, which has been fashioned without him, and which appears to him as an absolute to which he can only submit.  In his eyes, human inventions, words, customs, and values are given facts, as inevitable as the sky and the trees.  This means that the world in which he lives is a serious world, since the characteristic of the spirit of seriousness is to consider values as ready-made things.  That does not mean that the child himself is serious.  On the contrary, he is allowed to play, to expend his existence freely.  In his child’s circle he feels that he can passionately pursue and joyfully attain goals which he has set up for himself.  But if he fulfills this experience in all tranquillity, it is precisely because the domain open to his subjectivity seems insignificant and puerile in his own eyes.  He feels himself happily irresponsible.  The real world is that of adults where he is allowed only to respect and obey.  The naive victim of the mirage of the for-others, he believes in the being of his parents and teachers.  He takes them for the divinities which they vainly try to be and whose appearance they like to borrow before his ingenuous eyes.  Rewards, punishments, prizes, words of praise or blame instill in him the conviction that there exist a good and an evil which like a sun and a moon exist as ends in themselves.  In his universe of definite and substantial things, beneath the sovereign eyes of grown-up persons, he thinks that he too has being in a definite and substantial way.  He is a good little boy or a scamp; he enjoys being it.  If something deep inside him belies his conviction, he conceals this imperfection.  He consoles himself for an inconsistency which he attributes to his young age by pinning his hopes on the future.  Later on he too will become a big imposing statue.  While waiting, he plays at being, at being a saint, a hero, a guttersnipe.  He feels himself like those models whose images are sketched out in his books in broad, unequivocal strokes: explorer, brigand, sister of charity.  This game of being serious can take on such an importance in the child’s life that he himself actually becomes serious.  We know such children who are caricatures of adults.  Even when the joy of existing is strongest, when the child abandons himself to it, he feels himself protected against the risk of existence by the ceiling which human generations have built over his head.  And it is by virtue of this that the child’s condition (although it can be unhappy in other respects) is meta-physically privileged.  Normally the child escapes the anguish of freedom.  He can, if he likes, be recalcitrant, lazy; his whims and his faults concern only him.  They do not weigh upon the earth.  They can not make a dent in the serene order of a world which existed before him, without him, where he is in a state of security by virtue of his very insignificance.  He can do with impunity whatever he likes.  He knows that nothing can ever happen through him; everything is already given; his acts engage nothing, not even himself.  There are beings whose life slips by in an infantile world because, having been kept in a state of servitude and ignorance, they have no means of breaking the ceiling which is stretched over their heads.  Like the child, they can exercise their freedom, but only within this universe which has been set up before them, without them.  This is the case, for example, of slaves who have not raised themselves to the consciousness of their slavery.  The southern planters were not altogether in the wrong in considering the negroes who docilely submitted to their paternalism as “grown-up children.” To the extent that they respected the world of the whites the situation of the black slaves was exactly an infantile situation.  This is also the situation of women in many civilizations; they can only submit to the laws, the gods, the customs, and the truths created by the males.  Even today in western countries, among women who have not had in their work an apprenticeship of freedom, there are still many who take shelter in the shadow of men; they adopt without discussion the opinions and values recognized by their husband or their lover, and that allows them to develop childish qualities which are forbidden to adults because they are based on a feeling of irresponsibility.  If what is called women’s futility often has so much charm and grace, if it sometimes has a genuinely moving character, it is because it manifests a pure and gratuitous taste for existence, like the games of children; it is the absence of the serious.  The unfortunate thing is that in many cases this thoughtlessness, this gaiety, these charming inventions imply a deep complicity with the world of men which they seem so graciously to be contesting, and it is a mistake to be astonished, once the structure which shelters them seems to be in danger, to see sensitive, ingenuous, and light-minded women show themselves harder, more bitter, and even more furious or cruel than their masters.  It is then that we discover the difference which distinguishes them from an actual child: the child’s situation is imposed upon him, whereas the woman (I mean the western woman of today) chooses it or at least consents to it.  Ignorance and error are facts as inescapable as prison walls.  The negro slave of the eighteenth century, the Mohammedan woman enclosed in a harem have no instrument, be it in thought or by astonishment or anger, which permits them to attack the civilization which oppresses them.  Their behavior is defined and can be judged only within this given situation, and it is possible that in this situation, limited like every human situation, they realize a perfect assertion of their freedom.  But once there appears a possibility of liberation, it is resignation of freedom not to exploit the possibility, a resignation which implies dishonesty and which is a positive fault.  The fact is that it is very rare for the infantile world to maintain itself beyond adolescence.  From childhood on, flaws begin to be revealed in it.  With astonishment, revolt and disrespect the child little by little asks himself, “Why must I act that way? What good is it? And what will happen if I act in another way?” He discovers his subjectivity; he discovers that of others.  And when he arrives at the age of adolescence he begins to vacillate because he notices the contradictions among adults as well as their hesitations and weakness.  Men stop appearing as if they were gods, and at the same time the adolescent discovers the human character of the reality about him.  Language, customs, ethics, and values have their source in these uncertain creatures.  The moment has come when he too is going to be called upon to participate in their operation; his acts weigh upon the earth as much as those of other men.  He will have to choose and decide.  It is comprehensible that it is hard for him to live this moment of his history, and this is doubtless the deepest reason for the crisis of adolescence; the individual must at last assume his subjectivity.  From one point of view the collapsing of the serious world is a deliverance.  Although he was irresponsible, the child also felt himself defenseless before obscure powers which directed the course of things.  But whatever the joy of this liberation may be, it is not without great confusion that the adolescent finds himself cast into a world which is no longer ready-made, which has to be made; he is abandoned, unjustified, the prey of a freedom that is no longer chained up by anything.  What will he do in the face of this new situation? This is the moment when he decides.  If what might be called the natural history of an individual, his affective complexes, etcetera depend above all upon his childhood, it is adolescence which appears as the moment of moral choice.  Freedom is then revealed and he must decide upon his attitude in the face of it.  Doubtless, this decision can always be reconsidered, but the fact is that conversions are difficult because the world reflects back upon us a choice which is confirmed through this world which it has fashioned.  Thus, a more and more rigorous circle is formed from which one is more and more unlikely to escape.  Therefore, the misfortune which comes to man as a result of the fact that he was a child is that his freedom was first concealed from him and that all his life he will be nostalgic for the time when he did not know its exigencies.  This misfortune has still another aspect.  Moral choice is free, and therefore unforeseeable.  The child does not contain the man he will become.  Yet, it is always on the basis of what he has been that a man decides upon what he wants to be.  He draws the motivations of his moral attitude from within the character which he has given himself and from within the universe which is its correlative.  Now, the child set up this character and this universe little by little, without foreseeing its development.  He was ignorant of the disturbing aspect of this freedom which he was heedlessly exercising.  He tranquilly abandoned himself to whims, laughter, tears, and anger which seemed to him to have no morrow and no danger, and yet which left ineffaceable imprints about him.  The drama of original choice is that it goes on moment by moment for an entire lifetime, that it occurs without reason, before any reason, that freedom is there as if it were present only in the form of contingency.  This contingency recalls, in a way, the arbitrariness of the grace distributed by God in Calvinistic doctrine.  Here too there is a sort of predestination issuing not from an external tyranny but from the operation of the subject itself.  Only, we think that man has always a possible recourse to himself.  There is no choice so unfortunate that he cannot be saved.  It is in this moment of justification — a moment which extends throughout his whole adult life — that the attitude of man is placed on a moral plane.  The contingent spontaneity can not be judged in the name of freedom.  Yet a child already arouses sympathy or antipathy.  Every man casts himself into the world by making himself a lack of being; he thereby contributes to reinvesting it with human signification.  He discloses it.  And in this movement even the most outcast sometimes feel the joy of existing.  They then manifest existence as a happiness and the world as a source of joy.  But it is up to each one to make himself a lack of more or less various, profound, and rich aspects of being.  What is called vitality, sensitivity, and intelligence are not ready-made qualities, but a way of casting oneself into the world and of disclosing being.  Doubtless, every one casts himself into it on the basis of his physiological possibilities, but the body itself is not a brute fact.  It expresses our relationship to the world, and that is why it is an object of sympathy or repulsion.  And on the other hand, it determines no behavior.  There is vitality only by means of free generosity.  Intelligence supposes good will, and, inversely, a man is never stupid if he adapts his language and his behavior to his capacities, and sensitivity is nothing else but the presence which is attentive to the world and to itself.  The reward for these spontaneous qualities issues from the fact that they make significances and goals appear in the world.  They discover reasons for existing.  They confirm us in the pride and joy of our destiny as man.  To the extent that they subsist in an individual they still arouse sympathy, even if he has made himself hateful by the meaning which he has given to his life.  I have heard it said that at the Nuremberg trial Goering exerted a certain seductive power on his judges because of the vitality which emanated from him.  If we were to try to establish a kind of hierarchy among men, we would put those who are denuded of this living warmth — the tepidity which the Gospel speaks of — on the lowest rung of the ladder.  To exist is to make oneself a lack of being; it is to cast oneself into the world.  Those who occupy themselves in restraining this original movement can be considered as sub-men.  They have eyes and ears, but from their childhood on they make themselves blind and deaf, without love and without desire.  This apathy manifests a fundamental fear in the face of existence, in the face of the risks and tensions which it implies.  The sub-man rejects this “passion” which is his human condition, the laceration and the failure of that drive toward being which always misses its goal, but which thereby is the very existence which he rejects.  Such a choice immediately confirms itself.  Just as a bad painter, by a single movement, paints bad paintings and is satisfied with them, whereas in a work of value the artist immediately recognizes the demand of a higher sort of work, in like fashion the original poverty of his project exempts the sub-man from seeking to legitimize it.  He discovers around him only an insignificant and dull world.  How could this naked world arouse within him any desire to feel, to understand, to live? The less he exists, the less is there reason for him to exist, since these reasons are created only by existing.  Yet, he exists.  By the fact of transcending himself he indicates certain goals, he circumscribes certain values.  But he at once effaces these uncertain shadows.  His whole behavior tends toward an elimination of their ends.  By the incoherence of his plans, by his haphazard whims, or by his indifference, he reduces to nothingness the meaning of his surpassing.  His acts are never positive choices, only flights.  He can not prevent himself from being a presence in the world, but he maintains this presence on the plane of bare facticity.  However, if a man were permitted to be a brute fact, he would merge with the trees and pebbles which are not aware that they exist; we would consider these opaque lives with indifference.  But the sub-man arouses contempt, that is, one recognizes him to be responsible for himself at the moment that one accuses him of not willing himself.  The fact is that no man is a datum which is passively suffered; the rejection of existence is still another way of existing; nobody can know the peace of the tomb while he is alive.  There we have the defeat of the sub-man.  He would like to forget himself, to be ignorant of himself, but the nothingness which is at the heart of man is also the consciousness that he has of himself.  His negativity is revealed positively as anguish, desire, appeal, laceration, but as for the genuine return to the positive, the sub-man eludes it.  He is afraid of engaging himself in a project as he is afraid of being disengaged and thereby of being in a state of danger before the future, in the midst of its possibilities.  He is thereby led to take refuge in the ready-made values of the serious world.  He will proclaim certain opinions; he will take shelter behind a label; and to hide his indifference he will readily abandon himself to verbal outbursts or even physical violence.  One day, a monarchist, the next day, an anarchist, he is more readily anti-semitic, anti-clerical, or anti-republican.  Thus, though we have defined him as a denial and a flight, the sub-man is not a harmless creature.  He realizes himself in the world as a blind uncontrolled force which anybody can get control of.  In lynchings, in pogroms, in all the great bloody movements organized by the fanaticism of seriousness and passion, movements where there is no risk, those who do the actual dirty work are recruited from among the sub-men.  That is why every man who wills himself free within a human world fashioned by free men will be so disgusted by the sub-men.  Ethics is the triumph of freedom over facticity, and the sub-man feels only the facticity of his existence.  Instead of aggrandizing the reign of the human, he opposes his inert resistance to the projects of other men.  No project has meaning in the world disclosed by such an existence.  Man is defined as a wild flight.  The world about him is bare and incoherent.  Nothing ever happens; nothing merits desire or effort.  The sub-man makes his way across a world deprived of meaning toward a death which merely confirms his long negation of himself.  The only thing revealed in this experience is the absurd facticity of an existence which remains forever unjustified if it has not known how to justify itself.  The sub-man experiences the desert of the world in his boredom.  And the strange character of a universe with which he has created no bond also arouses fear in him.  Weighted down by present events, he is bewildered before the darkness of the future which is haunted by frightful specters, war, sickness, revolution, fascism, bolshevism.  The more indistinct these dangers are, the more fearful they become.  The sub-man is not very clear about what he has to lose, since he has nothing, but this very uncertainty re-enforces his terror.  Indeed, what he fears is that the shock of the unforeseen may remind him of the agonizing consciousness of himself.  Thus, fundamental as a man’s fear in the face of existence may be, though he has chosen from his earliest years to deny his presence in the world, he can not keep himself from existing, he can not efface the agonizing evidence of his freedom.  That is why, as we have just seen, in order to get rid of his freedom, he is led to engage it positively.  The attitude of the sub-man passes logically over into that of the serious man; he forces himself to submerge his freedom in the content which the latter accepts from society.  He loses himself in the object in order to annihilate his subjectivity.  This certitude has been described so frequently that it will not be necessary to consider it at length.  Hegel has spoken of it ironically.  In The Phenomenology of Mind he has shown that the sub-man plays the part of the inessential in the face of the object which is considered as the essential.  He suppresses himself to the advantage of the Thing, which, sanctified by respect, appears in the form of a Cause, science, philosophy, revolution, etc.  But the truth is that this ruse miscarries, for the Cause can not save the individual insofar as he is a concrete and separate existence.  After Hegel, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche also railed at the deceitful stupidity of the serious man and his universe.  And Being and Nothingness is in large part a description of the serious man and his universe.  The serious man gets rid of his freedom by claiming to subordinate it to values which would be unconditioned.  He imagines that the accession to these values likewise permanently confers value upon himself.  Shielded with “rights,” he fulfills himself as a being who is escaping from the stress of existence.  The serious is not defined by the nature of the ends pursued.  A frivolous lady of fashion can have this mentality of the serious as well as an engineer.  There is the serious from the moment that freedom denies itself to the advantage of ends which one claims are absolute.  Since all of this is well known, I should like to make only a few remarks in this place.  It is easily understood why, of all the attitudes which are not genuine, the latter is the most widespread; because every man was first a child.  After having lived under the eyes of the gods, having been given the promise of divinity, one does not readily accept becoming simply a man with all his anxiety and doubt.  What is to be done? What is to be believed? Often the young man, who has not, like the sub-man, first rejected existence, so that these questions are not even raised, is nevertheless frightened at having to answer them.  After a more or less long crisis, either he turns back toward the world of his parents and teachers or he adheres to the values which are new but seem to him just as sure.  Instead of assuming an affectivity which would throw him dangerously beyond himself, he represses it.  Liquidation, in its classic form of transference and sublimation, is the passage from the affective to the serious in the propitious shadow of dishonesty.  The thing that matters to the serious man is not so much the nature of the object which he prefers to himself, but rather the fact of being able to lose himself in it.  So much so, that the movement toward the object is, in fact, through his arbitrary act the most radical assertion of subjectivity: to believe for belief’s sake, to will for will’s sake is, detaching transcendence from its end, to realize one’s freedom in its empty and absurd form of freedom of indifference.  The serious man’s dishonesty issues from his being obliged ceaselessly to renew the denial of this freedom.  He chooses to live in an infantile world, but to the child the values are really given.  The serious man must mask the movement by which he gives them to himself, like the mythomaniac who while reading a love-letter pretends to forget that she has sent it to herself.  We have already pointed out that certain adults can live in the universe of the serious in all honesty, for example, those who are denied all instruments of escape, those who are enslaved or who are mystified.  The less economic and social circumstances allow an individual to act upon the world, the more this world appears to him as given.  This is the case of women who inherit a long tradition of submission and of those who are called “the humble.” There is often laziness and timidity in their resignation; their honesty is not quite complete; but to the extent that it exists, their freedom remains available, it is not denied.  They can, in their situation of ignorant and powerless individuals, know the truth of existence and raise themselves to a properly moral life.  It even happens that they turn the freedom which they have thus won against the very object of their respect; thus, in A Doll’s House, the childlike naivete of the heroine leads her to rebel against the lie of the serious.  On the contrary, the man who has the necessary instruments to escape this lie and who does not want to use them consumes his freedom in denying them.  He makes himself serious.  He dissimulates his subjectivity under the shield of rights which emanate from the ethical universe recognized by him; he is no longer a man, but a father, a boss, a member of the Christian Church or the Communist Party.  If one denies the subjective tension of freedom one is evidently forbidding himself universally to will freedom in an indefinite movement.  By virtue of the fact that he refuses to recognize that he is freely establishing the value of the end he sets up, the serious man makes himself the slave of that end.  He forgets that every goal is at the same time a point of departure and that human freedom is the ultimate, the unique end to which man should destine himself.  He accords an absolute meaning to the epithet useful, which, in truth, has no more meaning if taken by itself than the words high, low, right, and left.  It simply designates a relationship and requires a complement: useful for this or that.  The complement itself must be put into question, and, as we shall see later on, the whole problem of action is then raised.  But the serious man puts nothing into question.  For the military man, the army is useful; for the colonial administrator, the highway; for the serious revolutionary, the revolution — army, highway, revolution, productions becoming inhuman idols to which one will not hesitate to sacrifice man himself.  Therefore, the serious man is dangerous.  It is natural that he makes himself a tyrant.  Dishonestly ignoring the subjectivity of his choice, he pretends that the unconditioned value of the object is being asserted through him; and by the same token he also ignores the value of the subjectivity and the freedom of others, to such an extent that, sacrificing them to the thing, he persuades himself that what he sacrifices is nothing.  The colonial administrator who has raised the highway to the stature of an idol will have no scruple about assuring its construction at the price of a great number of lives of the natives; for, what value has the life of a native who is incompetent, lazy, and clumsy when it comes to building highways? The serious leads to a fanaticism which is as formidable as the fanaticism of passion.  It is the fanaticism of the Inquisition which does not hesitate to impose a credo, that is, an internal movement, by means of external constraints.  It is the fanaticism of the Vigilantes of America who defend morality by means of lynchings.  it is the political fanaticism which empties politics of all human content and imposes the State, not for individuals, but against them.  In order to justify the contradictory, absurd, and outrageous aspects of this kind of behavior, the serious man readily takes refuge in disputing the serious, but it is the serious of others which he disputes, not his own.  Thus, the colonial administrator is not unaware of the trick of irony.  He contests the importance of the happiness, the comfort, the very life of the native, but he reveres the Highway, the Economy, the French Empire; he reveres himself as a servant of these divinities.  Almost all serious men cultivate an expedient levity; we are familiar with the genuine gaiety of Catholics, the fascist “sense of humor.” There are also some who do not even feel the need for such a weapon.  They hide from themselves the incoherence of their choice by taking flight.  As soon as the Idol is no longer concerned, the serious man slips into the attitude of the sub-man.  He keeps himself from existing because he is not capable of existing without a guarantee.  Proust observed with astonishment that a great doctor or a great professor often shows himself, outside of his specialty, to be lacking in sensitivity, intelligence, and humanity.  The reason for this is that having abdicated his freedom, he has nothing else left but his techniques.  In domains where his techniques are not applicable, he either adheres to the most ordinary of values or fulfills himself as a flight.  The serious man stubbornly engulfs his transcendence in the object which bars the horizon and bolts the sky.  The rest of the world is a faceless desert.  Here again one sees how such a choice is immediately confirmed.  If there is being only, for example, in the form of the Army, how could the military man wish for anything else than to multiply barracks and maneuvers? No appeal rises from the abandoned zones where nothing can be reaped because nothing has been sown.  As soon as he leaves the staff, the old general becomes dull.  That is why the serious man’s life loses all meaning if he finds himself cut off from his ends.  Ordinarily, he does not put all his eggs into one basket, but if it happens that a failure or old age ruins all his justifications, then, unless there is a conversion, which is always possible, he no longer has any relief except in flight; ruined, dishonored, this important personage is now only a “has-been.” He joins the sub-man, unless by suicide he once and for all puts an end to the agony of his freedom.  It is in a state of fear that the serious man feels this dependence upon the object; and the first of virtues, in his eyes, is prudence.  He escapes the anguish of freedom only to fall into a state of preoccupation, of worry.  Everything is a threat to him, since the thing which he has set up as an idol is an externality and is thus in relationship with the whole universe and consequently threatened by the whole universe; and since, despite all precautions, he will never be the master of this exterior world to which he has consented to submit, he will be constantly upset by the uncontrollable course of events.  He will always be saying that he is disappointed, for his wish to have the world harden into a thing is belied by the very movement of life.  The future will contest his present successes; his children will disobey him, his will will be opposed by those of strangers; he will be a prey to illhumor and bitterness.  His very successes have a taste of ashes, for the serious is one of those ways of trying to realize the impossible synthesis of the in-itself and the foritself.  The serious man wills himself to be a god; but he is not one and knows it.  He wishes to rid himself of his subjectivity, but it constantly risks being unmasked; it is unmasked.  Transcending all goals, reflection wonders, “What’s the use?” There then blazes forth the absurdity of a life which has sought outside of itself the justifications which it alone could give itself.  Detached from the freedom which might have genuinely grounded them, all the ends that have been pursued appear arbitrary and useless.  This failure of the serious sometimes brings about a radical disorder.  Conscious of being unable to be anything, man then decides to be nothing.  We shall call this attitude nihilistic.  The nihilist is close to the spirit of seriousness, for instead of realizing his negativity as a living movement, he conceives his annihilation in a substantial way.  He wants to be nothing, and this nothing that he dreams of is still another sort of being, the exact Hegelian antithesis of being, a stationary datum.  Nihilism is disappointed seriousness which has turned back upon itself.  A choice of this kind is not encountered among those who, feeling the joy of existence, assume its gratuity.  It appears either at the moment of adolescence, when the individual, seeing his child’s universe flow away, feels the lack which is in his heart, or, later on, when the attempts to fulfill himself as a being have failed; in any case, among men who wish to rid themselves of the anxiety of their freedom by denying the world and themselves.  By this rejection, they draw near to the sub-man.  The difference is that their withdrawal is not their original movement.  At first, they cast themselves into the world, sometimes even with a largeness of spirit.  They exist and they know it.  It sometimes happens that, in his state of deception, a man maintains a sort of affection for the serious world; this is how Sartre describes Baudelaire in his study of the poet.  Baudelaire felt a burning rancor in regard to the values of his childhood, but this rancor still involved some respect.  Scorn alone liberated him.  It was necessary for him that the universe which he rejected continue in order for him to detest it and scoff at it; it is the attitude of the demoniacal man as Jouhandeau has also described him: one stubbornly maintains the values of childhood, of a society, or of a Church in order to be able to trample upon them.  The demoniacal man is still very close to the serious; he wants to believe in it; he confirms it by his very revolt; he feels himself as a negation and a freedom, but he does not realize this freedom as a positive liberation.  One can go much further in rejection by occupying himself not in scorning but in annihilating the rejected world and himself along with it.  For example, the man who gives himself to a cause which he knows to be lost chooses to merge the world with one of its aspects which carries within it the germ of its ruin, involving himself in this condemned universe and condemning himself with it.  Another man devotes his time and energy to an under-taking which was not doomed to failure at the start but which he himself is bent on ruining.  Still another rejects each of his projects one after the other, frittering them away in a series of caprices and thereby systematically annuling the ends which he is aiming at.  The constant negation of the word by the word, of the act by the act, of art by art was realized by Dadaist incoherence.  By following a strict injunction to commit disorder and anarchy, one achieved the abolition of all behavior, and therefore of all ends and of oneself.  But this will to negation is forever belying itself, for it manifests itself as a presence at the very moment that it displays itself.  It therefore implies a constant tension, inversely symmetrical with the existential and more painful tension, for if it is true that man is not, it is also true that he exists, and in order to realize his negativity positively he will have to contradict constantly the movement of existence.  If one does not resign himself to suicide one slips easily into a more stable attitude than the shrill rejection of nihilism.  Surrealism provides us with a historical and concrete example of different possible kinds of evolution.  Certain initiates, such as Vache and Crevel, had recourse to the radical solution of suicide.  Others destroyed their bodies and ruined their minds by drugs.  Other succeeded in a sort of moral suicide; by dint of depopulating the world around them, they found themselves in a desert, with themselves reduced to the level of the sub-man; they no longer try to flee, they are fleeing.  There are also some who have again sought out the security of the serious.  They have reformed, arbitrarily choosing marriage, politics, or religion as refuges.  Even the surrealists who have wanted to remain faithful to themselves have been unable to avoid returning to the positive, to the serious.  The negation of aesthetic, spiritual, and moral values has become an ethics; unruliness has become a rule.  We have been present at the establishment of a new Church, with its dogmas, its rites, its faithful, its priests, and even its martyrs; today, there is nothing of the destroyer in Breton; he is a pope.  And as every assassination of painting is still a painting, a lot of surrealists have found themselves the authors of positive works; their revolt has become the matter on which their career has been built.  Finally, some of them, in a genuine return to the positive, have been able to realize their freedom; they have given it a content without disavowing it.  They have engaged themselves, without losing themselves, in political action, in intellectual or artistic research, in family or social life.  The attitude of the nihilist can perpetuate itself as such only if it reveals itself as a positivity at its very core.  Rejecting his own existence, the nihilist must also reject the existences which confirm it.  If he wills himself to be nothing, all mankind must also be annihilated; otherwise, by means of the presence of this world that the Other reveals he meets himself as a presence in the world.  But this thirst for destruction immediately takes the form of a desire for power.  The taste of nothingness joins the original taste of being whereby every man is first defined; he realizes himself as a being by making himself that by which nothingness comes into the world.  Thus, Nazism was both a will for power and a will for suicide at the same time.  From a historical point of view, Nazism has many other features besides; in particular, beside the dark romanticism which led Rauschning to entitle his work The Revolution of Nihilism, we also find a gloomy seriousness.  The fact is that Nazism was in the service of petit bourgeois seriousness.  But it is interesting to note that its ideology did not make this alliance impossible, for the serious often rallies to a partial nihilism, denying everything which is not its object in order to hide from itself the antinomies of action.  A rather pure example of this impassioned nihilism is the well-known case of Drieu la Rochelle.  The Empty Suitcase is the testimony of a young man who acutely felt the fact of existing as a lack of being, of not being.  This is a genuine experience on the basis of which the only possible salvation is to assume the lack, to side with the man who exists against the idea of a God who does not.  On the contrary — a novel like Gilles is proof — Drieu stubbornly persisted in his deception.  In his hatred of himself he chose to reject his condition as a man, and this led him to hate all men along with himself.  Gilles knows satisfaction only when he fires on Spanish workers and sees the flow of blood which he compares to the redeeming blood of Christ; as if the only salvation by man were the death of other men, whereby perfect negation is achieved.  It is natural that this path ended in collaboration, the ruin of a detested world being merged for Drieu with the annulment of himself.  An external failure led him to give to his life a conclusion which it called for dialectically: suicide.  The nihilist attitude manifests a certain truth.  In this attitude one experiences the ambiguity of the human condition.  But the mistake is that it defines man not as the positive existence of a lack, but as a lack at the heart of existence, whereas the truth is that existence is not a lack as such.  And if freedom is experienced in this case in the form of rejection, it is not genuinely fulfilled.  The nihilist is right in thinking that the world possesses no justification and that he himself is nothing.  But he forgets that it is up to him to justify the world and to make himself exist validly.  Instead of integrating death into life, he.  sees in it the only truth of the life which appears to him as a disguised death.  However, there is life, and the nihilist knows that he is alive.  That’s where his failure lies.  He rejects existence without managing to eliminate it.  He denies any meaning to his transcendence, and yet he transcends himself.  A man who delights in freedom can find an ally in the nihilist because they contest the serious world together, but he also sees in him an enemy insofar as the nihilist is a systematic rejection of the world and man, and if this rejection ends up in a positive desire for destruction, it then establishes a tyranny which freedom must stand up against.  The fundamental fault of the nihilist is that, challenging all given values, he does not find, beyond their ruin, the importance of that universal, absolute end which freedom itself is.  It is possible that, even in this failure, a man may nevertheless keep his taste for an existence which he originally felt as a joy.  Hoping for no justification, he will nevertheless take delight in living.  He will not turn aside from things which he does not believe in.  He will seek a pretext in them for a gratuitous display of activity.  Such a man is what is generally called an adventurer.  He throws himself into his undertakings with zest, into exploration, conquest, war, speculation, love, politics, but he does not attach himself to the end at which he aims; only to his conquest.  He likes action for its own sake.  He finds joy in spreading through the world a freedom which remains indifferent to its content.  Whether the taste for adventure appears to be based on nihilistic despair or whether it is born directly from the experience of the happy days of childhood, it always implies that freedom is realized as an independence in regard to the serious world and that, on the other hand, the ambiguity of existence is felt not as a lack but in its positive aspect.  This attitude dialectically envelops nihilism’s opposition to the serious and the opposition to nihilism by existence as such.  But, of course, the concrete history of an individual does not necessarily espouse this dialectic, by virtue of the fact that his condition is wholly present to him at each moment and because his freedom before it is, at every moment, total.  From the time of his adolescence a man can define himself as an adventurer.  The union of an original, abundant vitality and a reflective scepticism will particularly lead to this choice.  It is obvious that this choice is very close to a genuinely moral attitude.  The adventurer does not propose to be; he deliberately makes himself a lack of being; he aims expressly at existence; though engaged in his undertaking, he is at the same time detached from the goal.  Whether he succeeds or fails, he goes right ahead throwing himself into a new enterprise to which he will give himself with the same indifferent ardor.  It is not from things that he expects the justification of his choices.  Considering such behavior at the moment of its subjectivity, we see that it conforms to the requirements of ethics, and if existentialism were solipsistic, as is generally claimed, it would have to regard the adventurer as its perfect hero.  First of all, it should be noticed that the adventurer’s attitude is not always pure.  Behind the appearance of caprice, there are many men who pursue a secret goal in utter seriousness; for example, fortune or glory.  They proclaim their scepticism in regard to recognized values.  They do not take politics seriously.  They thereby allow themselves to be collaborationists in ‘41 and communists in ‘45, and it is true they don’t give a hang about the interests of the French people or the proletariat; they are attached to their career, to their success.  This arrivisme is at the very antipodes of the spirit of adventure, because the zest for existence is then never experienced in its gratuity.  It also happens that the genuine love for adventure is inextricably mixed with an attachment to the values of the serious.  Cortez and the conquistadores served God and the emperor by serving their own pleasure.  Adventure can also be shot through with passion.  The taste for conquest is often subtly tied up with the taste for possession.  Was seduction all that Don Juan liked? Did he not also like women? Or was he not even looking for a woman capable of satisfying him? But even if we consider adventure in its purity, it appears to us to be satisfying only at a subjective moment, which, in fact, is a quite abstract moment.  The adventurer always meets others along the way; the conquistador meets the Indians; the condottiere hacks out a path through blood and ruins; the explorer has comrades about him or soldiers under his orders; every Don Juan is confronted with Elviras.  Every undertaking unfolds in a human world and affects men.  What distinguishes adventure from a simple game is that the adventurer does not limit himself to asserting his existence in solitary fashion.  He asserts it in relationship to other existences.  He has to declare himself.  Two attitudes are possible.  He can become conscious of the real requirements of his own freedom, which can will itself only by destining itself to an open future, by seeking to extend itself by means of the freedom of others.  Therefore, in any case, the freedom of other men must be respected and they must be helped to free themselves.  Such a law imposes limits upon action and at the same time immediately gives it a content.  Beyond the rejected seriousness is found a genuine seriousness.  But the man who acts in this way, whose end is the liberation of himself and others, who forces himself to respect this end through the means which he uses to attain it, no longer deserves the name of adventurer.  One would not dream for example, of applying it to a Lawrence, who was so concerned about the lives of his companions and the freedom of others, so tormented by the human problems which all action raises.  One is then in the presence of a genuinely free man.  The man we call an adventurer, on the contrary, is one who remains indifferent to the content, that is, to the human meaning of his action, who thinks he can assert his own existence without taking into account that of others.  The fate of Italy mattered very little to the Italian condottiere; the massacres of the Indians meant nothing to Pizarro; Don Juan was unaffected by Elvira’s tears.  Indifferent to the ends they set up for themselves, they were still more indifferent to the means of attaining them; they cared only for their pleasure or their glory.  This implies that the adventurer shares the nihilist’s contempt for men.  And it is by this very contempt that he believes he breaks away from the contemptible condition in which those who do not imitate his pride are stagnating.  Thus, nothing prevents him from sacrificing these insignificant beings to his own will for power.  He will treat them like instruments; he will destroy them if they get in his way.  But meanwhile he appears as an enemy in the eyes of others.  His undertaking is not only an individual wager; it is a combat.  He can not win the game without making himself a tyrant or a hangman.  And as he can not impose this tyranny without help, he is obliged to serve the regime which will allow him to exercise it.  He needs money, arms, soldiers, or the support of the police and the laws.  It is not a matter of chance, but a dialectical necessity which leads the adventurer to be complacent regarding all regimes which defend the privilege of a class or a party, and more particularly authoritarian regimes and fascism.  He needs fortune, leisure, and enjoyment, and he will take these goods as supreme ends in order to be prepared to remain free in regard to any end.  Thus, confusing a quite external availability with real freedom, he falls, with a pretext of independence, into the servitude of the object.  He will range himself on the side of the regimes which guarantee him his privileges, and he will prefer those which confirm him in his contempt regarding the common herd.  He will make himself its accomplice, its servant, or even its valet, alienating a freedom which, in reality, can not confirm itself as such if it does not wear its own face.  In order to have wanted to limit it to itself, in order to have emptied it of all concrete content, he realizes it only as an abstract independence which turns into servitude.  He must submit to masters unless he makes himself the supreme master.  Favorable circumstances are enough to transform the adventurer into a dictator.  He carries the seed of one within him, since he regards mankind as indifferent matter destined to support the game of his existence.  But what he then knows is the supreme servitude of tyranny.  Hegel’s criticism of the tyrant is applicable to the adventurer to the extent that he is himself a tyrant, or at the very least an accomplice of the oppressor.  No man can save himself alone.  Doubtless, in the very heat of an action the adventurer can know a joy which is sufficient unto itself, but once the undertaking is over and has congealed behind him into a thing, it must, in order to remain alive, be animated anew by a human intention which must transcend it toward the future into recognition or admiration.  When he dies, the adventurer will be surrendering his whole life into the hands of men; the only meaning it will have will be the one they confer upon it.  He knows this since he talks about himself, often in books.  For want of a work, many desire to bequeath their own personality to posterity: at least during their lifetime they need the approval of a few faithful.  Forgotten and detested, the adventurer loses the taste for his own existence.  Perhaps without his knowing it, it seems so precious to him because of others.  It willed itself to be an affirmation, an example to all mankind.  Once it falls back upon itself, it becomes futile and unjustified.  Thus, the adventurer devises a sort of moral behavior because he assumes his subjectivity positively.  But if he dishonestly refuses to recognize that this subjectivity necessarily transcends itself toward others, he will enclose himself in a false independence which will indeed be servitude.  To the free man he will be only a chance ally in whom one can have no confidence; he will easily become an enemy.  His fault is believing that one can do something for oneself without others and even against them.  The passionate man is, in a way, the antithesis of the adventurer.  In him too there is a sketch of the synthesis of freedom and its content.  But in the adventurer it is the content which does not succeed in being genuinely fulfilled.  Whereas in the passionate man it is subjectivity which fails to fulfill itself genuinely.  What characterizes the passionate man is that he sets up the object as an absolute, not, like the serious man, as a thing detached from himself, but as a thing disclosed by his subjectivity.  There are transitions between the serious and passion.  A goal which was first willed in the name of the serious can become an object of passion; inversely, a passionate attachment can wither into a serious relationship.  But real passion asserts the subjectivity of its involvement.  In amorous passion particularly, one does not want the beloved being to be admired objectively; one prefers to think her unknown, unrecognized; the lover thinks that his appropriation of her is greater if he is alone in revealing her worth.  That is the genuine thing offered by all passion.  The moment of subjectivity therein vividly asserts itself, in its positive form, in a movement toward the object.  It is only when passion has been degraded to an organic need that it ceases to choose itself.  But as long as it remains alive it does so because subjectivity is animating it; if not pride, at least complacency and obstinacy.  At the same time that it is an assumption of this subjectivity, it is also a disclosure of being.  It helps populate the world with desirable objects, with exciting meanings.  However, in the passions which we shall call maniacal, to distinguish them from the generous passions, freedom does not find its genuine form.  The passionate man seeks possession; he seeks to attain being.  The failure and the hell which he creates for himself have been described often enough.  He causes certain rare treasures to appear in the world, but he also depopulates it.  Nothing exists outside of his stubborn project; therefore nothing can induce him to modify his choices.  And having involved his whole life with an external object which can continually escape him, he tragically feels his dependence.  Even if it does not definitely disappear, the object never gives itself.  The passionate man makes himself a lack of being not that there might be being, but in order to be.  And he remains at a distance; he is never fulfilled.  That is why though the passionate man inspires a certain admiration, he also inspires a kind of horror at the same time.  One admires the pride of a subjectivity which chooses its end without bending itself to any foreign law and the precious brilliance of the object revealed by the force of this assertion.  But one also considers the solitude in which this subjectivity encloses itself as injurious.  Having withdrawn into an unusual region of the world, seeking not to communicate with other men, this freedom is realized only as a separation.  Any conversation, any relationship with the passionate man is impossible.  In the eyes of those who desire a communion of freedom, he therefore appears as a stranger, an obstacle.  He opposes an opaque resistance to the movement of freedom which wills itself infinite.  The passionate man is not only an inert facticity.  He too is on the way to tyranny.  He knows that his will emanates only from him, but he can nevertheless attempt to impose it upon others.  He authorizes himself to do that by a partial nihilism.  Only the object of his passion appears real and full to him.  All the rest are insignificant.  Why not betray, kill, grow violent? It is never nothing that one destroys.  The whole universe is perceived only as an ensemble of means or obstacles through which it is a matter of attaining the thing in which one has engaged his being.  Not intending his freedom for men, the passionate man does not recognize them as freedoms either.  He will not hesitate to treat them as things.  If the object of his passion concerns the world in general, this tyranny becomes fanaticism.  In all fanatical movements there exists an element of the serious.  The values invented by certain men in a passion of hatred, fear, or faith are thought and willed by others as given realities.  But there is no serious fanaticism which does not have a passional base, since all adhesion to the serious world is brought about by repressed tendencies and complexes.  Thus, maniacal passion represents a damnation for the one who chooses it, and for other men it is one of the forms of separation which disunites freedoms.  It leads to struggle and oppression.  A man who seeks being far from other men, seeks it against them at the same time that he loses himself.  Yet, a conversion can start within passion itself.  The cause of the passionate man’s torment is his distance from the object; but he must accept it instead of trying to eliminate it.  It is the condition within which the object is disclosed.  The individual will then find his joy in the very wrench which separates him from the being of which he makes himself a lack.  Thus, in the letters of Made-moiselle de Lespinasse there is constant passing from grief to the assumption of this grief.  The lover describes her tears and her tortures, but she asserts that she loves this unhappiness.  It is also a source of delight for her.  She likes the other to appear as another through her separation.  It pleases her to exalt, by her very suffering, that strange existence which she chooses to set up as worthy of any sacrifice.  It is only as something strange, forbidden, as something free, that the other is revealed as an other.  And to love him genuinely is to love him in his otherness and in that freedom by which he escapes.  Love is then renunciation of all possession, of all confusion.  One renounces being in order that there may be that being which one is not.  Such generosity, moreover, can not be exercised on behalf of any object whatsoever.  One can not love a pure thing in its independence and its separation, for the thing does not have positive independence.  If a man prefers the land he has discovered to the possession of this land, a painting or a statue to their material presence, it is insofar as they appear to him as possibilities open to other men.  Passion is converted to genuine freedom only if one destines his existence to other existences through the being — whether thing or man — at which he aims, without hoping to entrap it in the destiny of the in-itself.  Thus, we see that no existence can be validly fulfilled if it is limited to itself.  It appeals to the existence of others.  The idea of such a dependence is frightening, and the separation and multiplicity of existants raises highly disturbing problems.  One can understand that men who are aware of the risks and the inevitable element of failure involved in any engagement in the world attempt to fulfill themselves outside of the world.  Man is permitted to separate himself from this world by contemplation, to think about it, to create it anew.  Some men, instead of building their existence upon the indefinite unfolding of time, propose to assert it in its eternal aspect and to achieve it as an absolute.  They hope, thereby, to surmount the ambiguity of their condition.  Thus, many intellectuals seek their salvation either in critical thought or creative activity.  We have seen that the serious contradicts itself by the fact that not everything can be taken seriously.  It slips into a partial nihilism.  But nihilism is unstable.  It tends to return to the positive.  Critical thought attempts to militate everywhere against all aspects of the serious but without foundering in the anguish of pure negation.  It sets up a superior, universal, and timeless value, objective truth.  And, correlatively, the critic defines himself positively as the independence of the mind.  Crystallizing the negative movement of the criticism of values into a positive reality, he also crystallizes the negativity proper to all mind into a positive presence.  Thus, he thinks that he himself escapes all earthly criticism.  He does not have to choose between the highway and the native, between America and Russia, between production and freedom.  He understands, dominates, and rejects, in the name of total truth, the necessarily partial truths which every human engagement discloses.  But ambiguity is at the heart of his very attitude, for the independent man is still a man with his particular situation in the world, and what he defines as objective truth is the object of his own choice.  His criticisms fall into the world of particular men.  He docs not merely describe.  He takes sides.  If he does not assume the subjectivity of his judgment, he is inevitably caught in the trap of the serious.  Instead of the independent mind he claims to be, he is only the shameful servant of a cause to which he has not chosen to rally.  The artist and the writer force themselves to surmount existence in another way.  They attempt to realize it as an absolute.  What makes their effort genuine is that they do not propose to attain being.  They distinguish themselves thereby from an engineer or a maniac.  It is existence which they are trying to pin down and make eternal.  The word, the stroke, the very marble indicate the object insofar as it is an absence.  Only, in the work of art the lack of being returns to the positive.  Time is stopped, clear forms and finished meanings rise up.  In this return, existence is confirmed and establishes its own justification.  This is what Kant said when he defined art as “a finality without end.” By virtue of the fact that he has thus set up an absolute object, the creator is then tempted to consider himself as absolute.  He justifies the world and therefore thinks he has no need of anyone to justify himself.  If the work becomes an idol whereby the artist thinks that he is fulfilling himself as being, he is closing himself up in the universe of the serious; he is falling into the illusion which Hegel exposed when he described the race of “intellectual animals.” There is no way for a man to escape from this world.  It is in this world that — avoiding the pitfalls we have just pointed out — he must realize himself morally.  Freedom must project itself toward its own reality through a content whose value it establishes.  An end is valid only by a return to the freedom which established it and which willed itself through this end.  But this will implies that freedom is not to be engulfed in any goal; neither is it to dissipate itself vainly without aiming at a goal.  It is not necessary for the subject to seek to be, but it must desire that there be being.  To will oneself free and to will that there be being are one and the same choice, the choice that man makes of himself as a presence in the world.  We can neither say that the free man wants freedom in order to desire being, nor that he wants the disclosure of being by freedom.  These are two aspects of a single reality.  And whichever be the one under consideration, they both imply the bond of each man with all others.  This bond does not immediately reveal itself to everybody.  A young man wills himself free.  He wills that there be being.  This spontaneous liberality which casts him ardently into the world can ally itself to what is commonly called egoism.  Often the young man perceives only that aspect of his relationship to others whereby others appear as enemies.  In the preface to The Inner Experience Georges Bataille emphasizes very forcefully that each individual wants to be All.  He sees in every other man and particularly in those whose existence is asserted with most brilliance, a limit, a condemnation of himself.  “Each consciousness,” said Hegel, “seeks the death of the other.” And indeed at every moment others are stealing the whole world away from me.  The first movement is to hate them.  But this hatred is naive, and the desire immediately struggles against itself.  If I were really everything there would be nothing beside me; the world would be empty.  There would be nothing to possess, and I myself would be nothing.  If he is reasonable, the young man immediately understands that by taking the world away from me, others also give it to me, since a thing is given to me only by the movement which snatches it from me.  To will that there be being is also to will that there be men by and for whom the world is endowed with human significations.  One can reveal the world only on a basis revealed by other men.  No project can be defined except by its interference with other projects.  To make being “be” is to communicate with others by means of being.  This truth is found in another form when we say that freedom can not will itself without aiming at an open future.  The ends which it gives itself must be unable to be transcended by any reflection, but only the freedom of other men can extend them beyond our life.  I have tried to show in Pyrrhus and Cineas that every man needs the freedom of other men and, in a sense, always wants it, even though he may be a tyrant; the only thing he fails to do is to assume honestly the consequences of such a wish.  Only the freedom of others keeps each one of us from hardening in the absurdity of facticity.  And if we are to believe the Christian myth of creation, God himself was in agreement on this point with the existentialist doctrine since, in the words of an anti-fascist priest, “He had such respect for man that He created him free.” Thus, it can be seen to what an extent those people are mistaken — or are lying — who try to make of existentialism a solipsism, like Nietzsche, would exalt the bare will to power.  According to this interpretation, as widespread as it is erroneous, the individual, knowing himself and choosing himself as the creator of his own values, would seek to impose them on others.  The result would be a conflict of opposed wills enclosed in their solitude.  But we have seen that, on the contrary, to the extent that passion, pride, and the spirit of adventure lead to this tyranny and its conflicts, existentialist ethics condems them; and it does so not in the name of an abstract law, but because, if it is true that every project emanates from subjectivity, it is also true that this subjective movement establishes by itself a surpassing of subjectivity.  Man can find a justification of his own existence only in the existence of other men.  Now, he needs such a justification; there is no escaping it.  Moral anxiety does not come to man from without; he finds within himself the anxious question, “What’s the use?” Or, to put it better, he himself is this urgent interrogation.  He flees it only by fleeing himself, and as soon as he exists he answers.  It may perhaps be said that it is for himself that he is mora’, and that such an attitude is egotistical.  But there is no ethics against which this charge, which immediately destroys itself, can not be leveled; for how can I worry about what does not concern me? I concern others and they concern me.  There we have an irreducible truth.  The me-others relationship is as indissoluble as the subject-object relationship.  At the same time the other charge which is often directed at existentialism also collapses: of being a formal doctrine, incapable of proposing any content to the freedom which it wants engaged.  To will oneself free is also to will others free.  This will is not an abstract formula.  It points out to each person concrete action to be achieved.  But the others are separate, even opposed, and the man of good will sees concrete and difficult problems arising in his relations with them.  It is this positive aspect of morality that we are now going to examine.  The Ethics of Ambiguity III 1.  THE AESTHETIC ATTITUDE Thus, every man has to do with other men.  The world in which he engages himself is a human world in which each object is penetrated with human meanings.  It is a speaking world from which solicitations and appeals rise up.  This means that, through this world, each individual can give his freedom a concrete content.  He must disclose the world with the purpose of further disclosure and by the same movement try to free men, by means of whom the world takes on meaning.  But we shall find here the same objection that we met when we examined the abstract moment of individual ethics.  If every man is free, he can not will himself free.  Likewise the objection will be raised that he can will nothing for another since that other is free in all circumstances; men are always disclosing being, in Buchenwald as well as in the blue isles of the Pacific, in hovels as well as in palaces; something is always happening in the world, and in the movement of keeping being at a distance, can one not consider its different transformations with a detached joy, or find reasons for acting? No solution is better or worse than any Other.  We may call this attitude aesthetic because the one who adopts it claims to have no other relation with the world than that of detached contemplation; outside of time and far from men, he faces history, which he thinks he does not belong to, like a pure beholding; this impersonal version equalizes all situations; it apprehends them only in the indifference of their differences; it excludes any preference.  Thus, the lover of historical works is present at the birth and the downfall of Athens, Rome, and Byzantium with the same serene passion.  The tourist considers the arena of the Coliseum, the Latifundia of Syracuse, the thermal baths, the palaces, the temples, the prisons, and the churches with the same tranquil curiosity: these things existed, that is enough to satisfy him.  Why not also consider with impartial interest those that exist today? One finds this temptation among many Italians who are weighed down by a magical and deceptive past; the present already seems to them like a future past.  Wars, civil disputes, invasions and slavery have succeeded one another in their land.  Each moment of that tormented history is contradicted by the following one; and yet in the very midst of this vain agitation there arose domes, statues, bas-reliefs, paintings and palaces which have remained intact through the centuries and which still enchant the men of today.  One can imagine an intellectual Florentine being skeptical about the great uncertain movements which are stirring up his country and which will die out as did the seethings of the centuries which have gone by: as he sees it, the important thing is merely to understand the temporary events and through them to cultivate that beauty which perishes not.  Many Frenchmen also sought relief in this thought in 1940 and the years which followed.  “Let’s try to take the point of view of history,” they said upon learning that the Germans had entered Paris.  And during the whole occupation certain intellectuals sought to keep “aloof from the fray” and to consider impartially contingent facts which did not concern them.  But we note at once that such an attitude appears in moments of discouragement and confusion; in fact, it is a position of withdrawal, a way of fleeing the truth of the present.  As concerns the past, this eclecticism is legitimate; we are no longer in a live situation in regard to Athens, Sparta, or Alexandria, and the very idea of a choice has no meaning.  But the present is not a potential past; it is the moment of choice and action; we can not avoid living it through a project; and there is no project which is purely contemplative since one always projects himself toward something, toward the future; to put oneself “outside” is still a way of living the inescapable fact that one is inside; those French intellectuals who, in the name of history, poetry, or art, sought to rise above the drama of the age, were willynilly its actors; more or less explicitly, they were playing the occupier’s game.  Likewise, the Italian aesthete, occupied in caressing the marbles and bronzes of Florence, is playing a political role in the life of his country by his very inertia.  One can not justify all that is by asserting that everything may equally be the object of contemplation, since man never contemplates: he does.  It is for the artist and the writer that the problem is raised in a particularly acute and at the same time equivocal manner, for then one seeks to set up the indifference of human situations not in the name of pure contemplation, but of a definite project: the creator projects toward the work of art a subject which he justifies insofar as it is the matter of this work; any subject may thus be admitted, a massacre as well as a masquerade.  This aesthetic justification is sometimes so striking that it betrays the author’s aim; let us say that a writer wants to communicate the horror inspired in him by children working in sweatshops; he produces so beautiful a book that, enchanted by the tale, the style, and the images, we forget the horror of the sweatshops or even start admiring it.  Will we not then be inclined to think that if death, misery, and injustice can be transfigured for our delight, it is not an evil for there to be death, misery, and injustice? But here too we must not confuse the present with the past.  With regard to the past, no further action is possible.  There have been war, plague, scandal, and treason, and there is no way of our preventing their having taken place; the executioner became an executioner and the victim underwent his fate as a victim without us; all that we can do is to reveal it, to integrate it into the human heritage, to raise it to the dignity of the aesthetic existence which bears within itself its finality; but first this history had to occur: it occurred as scandal, revolt, crime, or sacrifice, and we were able to try to save it only because it first offered us a form.  Today must also exist before being confirmed in its existence: it exists only as an engagement and a commitment.  If we first considered the world as an object to be manifested, if we thought that it was saved by this destination in such a way that everything about it already seemed justified and that there was no more of it to reject, then there would also be nothing to say about it, for no form would take shape in it; it is revealed only through rejection, desire, hate and love.  In order for the artist to have a world to express he must first be situated in this world, oppressed or oppressing, resigned or rebellious, a man among men.  But at the heart of his existence he finds the exigence which is common to all men; he must first will freedom within himself and universally; he must try to conquer it: in the light of this project situations are graded and reasons for acting are made manifest.  2.  FREEDOM AND LIBERATION One of the chief objections leveled against existentialism is that the precept “to will freedom” is only a hollow formula and offers no concrete content for action.  But that is because one has begun by emptying the word freedom of its concrete meaning; we have already seen that freedom realizes itself only by engaging itself in the world: to such an extent that man’s project toward freedom is embodied for him in definite acts of behavior.  To will freedom and to will to disclose being are one and the same choice; hence, freedom takes a positive and constructive step which causes being to pass to existence in a movement which is constantly surpassed.  Science, technics, art, and philosophy are indefinite conquests of existence over being; it is by assuming themselves as such that they take on their genuine aspect; it is in the light of this assumption that the word progress finds its veridical meaning.  It is not a matter of approaching a fixed limit: absolute Knowledge or the happiness of man or the perfection of beauty; all human effort would then be doomed to failure, for with each step forward the horizon recedes a step; for man it is a matter of pursuing the expansion of his existence and of retrieving this very effort as an absolute.  Science condemns itself to failure when, yielding to the infatuation of the serious, it aspires to attain being, to contain it, and to possess it; but it finds its truth if it considers itself as a free engagement of thought in the given, aiming, at each discovery, not at fusion with the thing, but at the possibility of new discoveries; what the mind then projects is the concrete accomplishment of its freedom.  The attempt is sometimes made to find an objective justification of science in technics; but ordinarily the mathematician is concerned with mathematics and the physicist with physics, and not with their applications.  And, furthermore, technics itself is not objectively justified; if it sets up as absolute goals the saving of time and work which it enables us to realize and the comfort and luxury which it enables us to have access to, then it appears useless and absurd, for the time that one gains can not be accumulated in a store house; it is contradictory to want to save up existence, which, the fact is, exists only by being spent, and there is a good case for showing that airplanes, machines, the telephone, and the radio do not make men of today happier than those of former times.  But actually it is not a question of giving men time and happiness, it is not a question of stopping the movement of life: it is a question of fulfilling it.  If technics is attempting to make up for this lack, which is at the very heart of existence, it fails radically; but it escapes all criticism if one admits that, through it, existence, far from wishing to repose in the security of being, thrusts itself ahead of itself in order to thrust itself still farther ahead, that it aims at an indefinite disclosure of being by the transformation of the thing into an instrument and at the opening of ever new possibilities for man.  As for art, we have already said that it should not attempt to set up idols; it should reveal existence as a reason for existing; that is really why Plato, who wanted to wrest man away from the earth and assign him to the heaven of Ideas, condemned the poets; that is why every humanism on the other hand, crowns them with laurels.  Art reveals the transitory as an absolute; and as the transitory existence is perpetuated through the centuries, art too, through the centuries, must perpetuate this never-to-be-finished revelation.  Thus, the constructive activities of man take on a valid meaning only when they are assumed as a movement toward freedom; and reciprocally, one sees that such a movement is concrete: discoveries, inventions, industries, culture, paintings, and books people the world concretely and open concrete possibilities to men.  Perhaps it is permissible to dream of a future when men will know no other use of their freedom than this free unfurling of itself; constructive activity would be possible for all; each one would be able to aim positively through his projects at his own future.  But today the fact is that there are men who can justify their life only by a negative action.  As we have already seen, every man transcends himself.  But it happens that this transcendence is condemned to fall uselessly back upon itself because it is cut off from its goals.  That is what defines a situation of oppression.  Such a situation is never natural: man is never oppressed by things; in any case, unless he is a naive child who hits stones or a mad prince who orders the sea to be thrashed, he does not rebel against things, but only against other men.  The resistance of the thing sustains the action of man as air sustains the flight of the dove; and by projecting himself through it man accepts its being an obstacle; he assumes the risk of a setback in which he does not see a denial of his freedom.  The explorer knows that he may be forced to withdraw before arriving at his goal; the scientist, that a certain phenomenon may remain obscure to him; the technician, that his attempt may prove abortive: these withdrawals and errors are another way of disclosing the world.  Certainly, a material obstacle may cruelly stand in the way of an undertaking: floods, earthquakes, grasshoppers, epidemics and plague are scourges; but here we have one of the truths of Stoicism: a man must assume even these misfortunes, and since he must never resign himself in favor of any thing, no destruction of a thing will ever be a radical ruin for him; even his death is not an evil since he is man only insofar as he is mortal: he must assume it as the natural limit of his life, as the risk implied by every step.  Only man can be an enemy for man; only he can rob him of the meaning of his acts and his life because it also belongs only to him alone to confirm it in its existence, to recognize it in actual fact as a freedom.  It is here that the Stoic distinction between “things which do not depend upon us” and those which “depend upon us” proves to be insufficient: for “we” is legion and not an individual; each one depends upon others, and what happens to me by means of others depends upon me as regards its meaning; one does not submit to a war or an occupation as he does to an earthquake: he must take sides for or against, and the foreign wills thereby become allied or hostile.  It is this interdependence which explains why oppression is possible and why it is hateful.  As we have seen, my freedom, in order to fulfill itself, requires that it emerge into an open future: it is other men who open the future to me, it is they who, setting up the world of tomorrow, define my future; but if, instead of allowing me to participate in this constructive movement, they oblige me to consume my transcendence in vain, if they keep me below the level which they have conquered and on the basis of which new conquests will be achieved, then they are cutting me off from the future, they are changing me into a thing.  Life is occupied in both perpetuating itself and in surpassing itself; if all it does is maintain itself, then living is only not dying, and human existence is indistinguishable from an absurd vegetation; a life justifies itself only if its effort to perpetuate itself is integrated into its surpassing and if this surpassing has no other limits than those which the subject assigns himself.  Oppression divides the world into two clans: those who enlighten mankind by thrusting it ahead of itself and those who are condemned to mark time hopelessly in order merely to support the collectivity; their life is a pure repetition of mechanical gestures; their leisure is just about sufficient for them to regain their strength; the oppressor feeds himself on their transcendence and refuses to extend it by a free recognition.  The oppressed has only one solution: to deny the harmony of that mankind from which an attempt is made to exclude him, to prove that he is a man and that he is free by revolting against the tyrants.  In order to prevent this revolt, one of the ruses of oppression is to camouflage itself behind a natural situation since, after all, one can not revolt against nature.  When a conservative wishes to show that the proletariat is not oppressed, he declares that the present distribution of wealth is a natural fact and that there is thus no means of rejecting it; and doubtless he has a good case for proving that, strictly speaking, he is not stealing from the worker the product of his labor, since the word theft supposes social conventions which in other respects authorizes this type of exploitation; but what the revolutionary means by this word is that the present regime is a human fact.  As such, it has to be rejected.  This rejection cuts off the will of the oppressor, in his turn, from the future toward which he was hoping to thrust himself alone: another future is substituted, that of revolution.  The struggle is not one of words and ideologies; it is real and concrete: if it is this future which triumphs, and not the former, then it is the oppressed who is realized as a positive and open freedom and the oppressor who becomes an obstacle and a thing.  There are thus two ways of surpassing the given: it is something quite different from taking a trip or escaping from prison.  In these two cases the given is present in its surpassing; but in one case it is present insofar as it is accepted, in the other insofar as rejected, and that makes a radical difference.  Hegel has confused these two movements with the ambiguous term “aufheben”; and the whole structure of an optimism which denies failure and death rests on this ambiguity; that is what allows one to regard the future of the world as a continuous and harmonious development; this confusion is the source and also the consequence; it is a perfect epitome of that idealistic and verbose flabbiness with which Marx charged Hegel and to which he opposed a realistic toughness.  Revolt is not integrated into the harmonious development of the world; it does not wish to be integrated but rather to explode at the heart of the world and to break its continuity.  It is no accident if Marx defined the attitude of the proletariat not positively but negatively: he does not show it as affirming itself or as seeking to realize a classless society, but rather as first attempting to put an end to itself as a class.  And it is precisely because it has no other issue than a negative one that this situation must be eliminated.  All men are interested in this elimination, the oppressor as well as the oppressed, as Marx himself has said, for each one needs to have all men free.  There are cases where the slave does not know his servitude and where it is necessary to bring the seed of his liberation to him from the outside: his submission is not enough to justify the tyranny which is imposed upon him.  The slave is submissive when one has succeeded in mystifying him in such a way that his situation does not seem to him to be imposed by men, but to be immediately given by nature, by the gods, by the powers against whom revolt has no meaning; thus, he does not accept his condition through a resignation of his freedom since he can not even dream of any other; and in his relationships with his friends, for example, he can live as a free and moral man within this world where his ignorance has enclosed him.  The conservative will argue from this that this peace should not be disturbed; it is not necessary to give education to the people or comfort to the natives of the colonies; the “ringleaders” should be suppressed; that is the meaning of an old story of Maurras: there is no need to awaken the sleeper, for that would be to awaken him to unhappiness.  Certainly it is not a question of throwing men in spite of themselves, under the pretext of liberation, into a new world, one which they have not chosen, on which they have no grip.  The proponents of slavery in the Carolinas had a good case when they showed the conquerors old negro slaves who were be- wildered by a freedom which they didn’t know what to do with and who cried for their former masters; these false liberations — though in a certain sense they are inevitable — overwhelm those who are their victims as if they were a new blow of blind fate.  What must be done is to furnish the ignorant slave with the means of transcending his situation by means of revolt, to put an end to his ignorance.  We know that the problem of the nineteenth-century socialists was precisely to develop a class consciousness in the proletariat; we see in the life of Flora Tristan, for example, how thankless such a task was: what she wanted for the workers had first to be wanted without them.  “But what right does one have to want something for others?” asks the conservative, who meanwhile regards the workingman or the native as “a grown-up child” and who does not hesitate to dispose of the child’s will.  Indeed, there is nothing more arbitrary than intervening as a stranger in a destiny which is not ours: one of the shocking things about charity — in the civic sense of the word — is that it is practised from the outside, according to the caprice of the one who distributes it and who is detached from the object.  But the cause of freedom is not that of others more than it is mine: it is universally human.  If I want the slave to become conscious of his servitude, it is both in order not to be a tyrant myself — for any abstention is complicity, and complicity in this case is tyranny — and in order that new possibilities might be opened to the liberated slave and through him to all men.  To want existence, to want to disclose the world, and to want men to be free are one and the same will.  Moreover, the oppressor is lying if he claims that the oppressed positively wants oppression; he merely abstains from not wanting it because he is unaware of even the possibility of rejection.  All that an external action can propose is to put the oppressed in the presence of his freedom: then he will decide positively and freely.  The fact is that he decides against oppression, and it is then that the movement of emancipation really begins.  For if it is true that the cause of freedom is the cause of each one, it is also true that the urgency of liberation is not the same for all; Marx has rightly said that it is only to the oppressed that it appears as immediately necessary.  As for us, we do not believe in a literal necessity but in a moral exigence; the oppressed can fulfill his freedom as a man only in revolt, since the essential characteristic of the situation against which he is rebelling is precisely its prohibiting him from any positive development; it is only in social and political struggle that his transcendence passes beyond to the infinite.  And certainly the proletarrian is no more naturally a moral man than another; he can flee from his freedom, dissipate it, vegetate without desire, and give himself up to an inhuman myth; and the trick of “enlightened” capitalism is to make him forget about his concern with genuine justification, offering him, when he leaves the factory where a mechanical job absorbs his transcendence, diversions in which this transcendence ends by petering out: there you have the politics of the American employing class which catches the worker in the trap of sports, “gadgets,” autos, and frigidaires.  On the whole, however, he has fewer temptations of betrayal than the members of the privileged classes because the satisfying of his passions, the taste for adventure, and the satisfactions of social seriousness are denied him.  And in particular, it is also possible for the bourgeois and the intellectual to use their freedom positively at the same time as they can cooperate in the struggle against oppression: their future is not barred.  That is what Ponge, for example, suggests when he writes that he is producing “post-revolutionary” literature.  The writer, as well as the scientist and the technician, has the possibility of realizing, before the revolution is accomplished, this re-creation of the world which should be the task of every man if freedom were no longer enchained anywhere.  Whether or not it is desirable to anticipate the future, whether men have to give up the positive use of their freedom as long as the liberation of all has not yet been achieved, or whether, on the contrary, any human fulfillment serves the cause of man, is a point about which revolutionary politics itself is still hesitating.  Even in the Soviet Union itself the relation between the building of the future and the present struggle seems to be defined in very different ways according to the moment and the circumstances.  It is also a matter wherein each individual has to invent his solution freely.  In any case, we can assert that the oppressed is more totally engaged in the struggle than those who, though at one with him in rejecting his servitude, do not experience it; but also that, on the other hand, every man is affected by this struggle in so essential a way that he can not fulfill himself morally without taking part in it.  The problem is complicated in practice by the fact that today oppression has more than one aspect: the Arabian fellah is oppressed by both the sheiks and the French and English administration; which of the two enemies is to be combatted? The interests of the French proletariat are not the same as those of the natives in the colonies: which are to be served? But here the question is political before being moral: we must end by abolishing all suppression; each one must carry on his struggle in connection with that of the other and by integrating it into the general pattern.  What order should be followed? What tactics should be adopted? It is a matter of opportunity and efficiency.  For each one it also depends upon his individual situation.  It is possible that he may be led to sacrifice temporarily a cause whose success is subordinate to that of a cause whose defense is more urgent; on the other hand, it is possible that one may judge it necessary to maintain the tension of revolt against a situation to which one does not wish to consent at any price: thus, during the war, when Negro leaders in America were asked to drop their own claims for the sake of the general interest, Richard Wright refused; he thought that even in time of war his cause had to be defended.  In any case, morality requires that the combatant be not blinded by the goal which he sets up for himself to the point of falling into the fanaticism of seriousness or passion.  The cause which he serves must not lock itself up and thus create a new element of separation: through his own struggle he must seek to serve the universal cause of freedom.  At once the oppressor raises an objection: under the pretext of freedom, he says, there you go oppressing me in turn; you deprive me of my freedom.  It is the argument which the Southern slaveholders opposed to the abolitionists, and we know that the Yankees were so imbued with the principles of an abstract democracy that they did not grant that they had the right to deny the Southern planters the freedom to own slaves; the Civil War broke out with a completely formal pretext.  We smile at such scruples; yet today America still recognizes more or less implicitly that Southern whites have the freedom to lynch negroes.  And it is the same sophism which is innocently displayed in the newspapers of the P.  R.  L.  (Parti Republicain de la Liberte) and, more or less subtly, in all conservative organs.  When a party promises the directing classes that it will defend their freedom, it means quite plainly that it demands that they have the freedom of exploiting the working class.  A claim of this kind does not outrage us in the name of abstract justice; but a contradiction is dishonestly concealed there.  For a freedom wills itself genuinely only by willing itself as an indefinite movement through the freedom of others; as soon as it withdraws into itself, it denies itself on behalf of some object which it prefers to itself: we know well enough what sort of freedom the P.  R.  L.  demands: it is property, the feeling of possession, capital, comfort, moral security.  We have to respect freedom only when it is intended for freedom, not when it strays, flees itself, and resigns itself.  A freedom which is interested only in denying freedom must be denied.  And it is not true that the recognition of the freedom of others limits my own freedom: to be free is not to have the power to do anything you like; it is to be able to surpass the given toward an open future; the existence of others as a freedom defines my situation and is even the condition of my own freedom.  I am oppressed if I am thrown into prison, but not if I am kept from throwing my neighbor into prison.  Indeed, the oppressor himself is conscious of this sophism; he hardly dares to have recourse to it; rather than make an unvarnished demand for freedom to oppress he is more apt to present himself as the defender of certain values.  It is not in his own name that he is fighting, but rather in the name of civilization, of institutions, of monuments, and of virtues which realize objectively the situation which he intends to maintain; he declares that all these things are beautiful and good in themselves; he defends a past which has assumed the icy dignity of being against an uncertain future whose values have not yet been won; this is what is well expressed by the label “conservative.” As some people are curators of a museum or a collection of medals, others make themselves the curators of the given world; stressing the sacrifices that are necessarily involved in all change, they side with what has been over against what has not yet been.  It is quite certain that the surpassing of the past toward the future always demands sacrifices; to claim that in destroying an old quarter in order to build new houses on its ruins one is preserving it dialectically is a play on words; no dialectic can restore the old port of Marseilles; the past as something not surpassed, in its flesh and blood presence, has completely vanished.  All that a stubborn optimism can claim is that the past does not concern us in this particular and fixed form and that we have sacrificed nothing in sacrificing it; thus, many revolutionaries consider it healthy to refuse any attachment to the past and to profess to scorn monuments and traditions.  A left-wing journalist who was fuming impatiently in a street of Pompeii said, “What are we doing here? We’re wasting our time.” This attitude is self-confirming; let us turn away from the past, and there no longer remains any trace of it in the present, or for the future; the people of the Middle Ages had so well forgotten antiquity that there was no longer anyone who even had a desire to know something about it.  One can live without Greek, without Latin, without cathedrals, and without history.  Yes, but there are many other things that one can live without; the tendency of man is not to reduce himself but to increase his power.  To abandon the past to the night of facticity is a way of depopulating the world.  I would distrust a humanism which was too indifferent to the efforts of the men of former times; if the disclosure of being achieved by our ancestors does not at all move us, why be so interested in that which is taking place today; why wish so ardently for future realizations? To assert the reign of the human is to acknowledge man in the past as well in the future.  The Humanists of the Renaissance are an example of the help to be derived by a movement of liberation from being rooted in the past; no doubt the study of Greek and Latin does not have this living force in every age; but in any case, the fact of having a past is part of the human condition; if the world behind us were bare, we would hardly be able to see anything before us but a gloomy desert.  We must try, through our living projects, to turn to our own account that freedom which was undertaken in the past and to integrate it into the present world.  But on the other hand, we know that if the past concerns us, it does so not as a brute fact, but insofar as it has human signification; if this signification can be recognized only by a project which refuses the legacy of the past, then this legacy must be refused; it would be absurd to uphold against man a datum which is precious only insofar as the freedom of man is expressed in it.  There is one country where the cult of the past is erected into a system more than anywhere else: it is the Portugal of today; but it is at the cost of a deliberate contempt for man.  Salazar has had brand-new castles built, at great expense, on all the hills where there were ruins standing, and at Obidos he had no hesitation in appropriating for this restoration the funds that were to go to the maternity hospital, which, as a result, had to be closed; on the outskirts of Coimbre where a children’s community was to be set up, he spent so much money having the different types of old Portuguese houses reproduced on a reduced scale that barely four children could be lodged in this monstrous village.  Dances, songs, local festivals, and the wearing of old regional costumes are encouraged everywhere: they never open a school.  Here we see, in its extreme form, the absurdity of a choice which prefers the Thing to Man from whom alone the Thing can receive its value.  We may be moved by dances, songs, and regional costumes because these inventions represent the only free accomplishment which was allowed the peasants amidst the hard conditions under which they formerly lived; by means of these creations they tore themselves away from their servile work, transcended their situation, and asserted themselves as men before the beasts of burden.  Wherever these festivals still exist spontaneously, where they have retained this character, they have their meaning and their value.  But when they are ceremoniously reproduced for the edification of indifferent tourists, they are no more than a boring documentary, even an odious mystification.  It is a sophism to want to maintain by coercion things which derive their worth from the fact that men attempted through them to escape from coercion.  In like manner, all those who oppose old lace, rugs, peasant coifs, picturesque houses, regional costumes, hand-made cloth, old language, etcetera, to social evolution know very well that they are dishonest: they themselves do not much value the present reality of these things, and most of the time their lives clearly show it.  To be sure, they treat those who do not recognize the unconditional value of an Alencon point as ignoramuses; but at heart they know that these objects are less precious in themselves than as the manifestation of the civilization which they represent.  They are crying up the patience and the submission of industrious hands which were one with their needle as much as they are the lace.  We also know that the Nazis made very handsome bindings and lampshades out of human skin.  Thus, oppression can in no way justify itself in the name of the content which it is defending and which it dishonestly sets up as an idol.  Bound up with the subjectivity which established it, this content requires its own surpassing.  One does not love the past in its living truth if he insists on preserving its hardened and mummified forms.  The past is an appeal; it is an appeal toward the future which sometimes can save it only by destroying it.  Even though this destruction may be a sacrifice, it would be a lie to deny it: since man wants there to be being, he can not renounce any form of being without regret.  But a genuine ethics does not teach us either to sacrifice it or deny it: we must assume it.  The oppressor does not merely try to justify himself as a conserver.  Often he tries to invoke future realizations; he speaks in the name of the future.  Capitalism sets itself up as the regime which is most favorable to production; the colonist is the only one capable of exploiting the wealth which the native would leave fallow.  Oppression tries to defend itself by its utility.  But we have seen that it is one of the lies of the serious mind to attempt to give the word “useful” an absolute meaning; nothing is useful if it is not useful to man; nothing is useful to man if the latter is not in a position to define his own ends and values, if he is not free.  Doubtless an oppressive regime can achieve constructions which will serve man: they will serve him only from the day that he is free to use them; as long as the reign of the oppressor lasts, none of the benefits of oppression is a real benefit.  Neither in the past nor in the future can one prefer a thing to Man, who alone can establish the reason for all things.  Finally, the oppressor has a good case for showing that respect for freedom is never without difficulty, and perhaps he may even assert that one can never respect all freedoms at the same time.  But that simply means that man must accept the tension of the struggle, that his liberation must actively seek to perpetuate itself, without aiming at an impossible state of equilibrium and rest; this does not mean that he ought to prefer the sleep of slavery to this incessant conquest.  Whatever the problems raised for him, the setbacks that he will have to assume, and the difficulties with which he will have to struggle, he must reject oppression at any cost.  3.  THE ANTINOMIES OF ACTION As we have seen, if the oppressor were aware of the demands of his own freedom, he himself should have to denounce oppression.  But he is dishonest; in the name of the serious or of his passions, of his will for power or of his appetites, he refuses to give up his privileges.  In order for a liberating action to be a thoroughly moral action, it would have to be achieved through a conversion of the oppressors: there would then be a reconciliation of all freedoms.  But no one any longer dares to abandon himself today to these Utopian reveries.  We know only too well that we can not count upon a collective conversion.  However, by virtue of the fact that the oppressors refuse to co-operate in the affirmation of freedom, they embody, in the eyes of all men of good will, the absurdity of facticity; by calling for the triumph of freedom over facticity, ethics also demands that they be suppressed; and since their subjectivity, by definition, escapes our control, it will be possible to act only on their objective presence; others will here have to be treated like things, with violence; the sad fact of the separation of men will thereby be confirmed.  Thus, here is the oppressor oppressed in turn; and the men who do violence to him in their turn become masters, tyrants, and executioners: in revolting, the oppressed are metamorphosed into a blind force, a brutal fatality; the evil which divides the world is carried out in their own hearts.  And doubtless it is not a question of backing out of these consequences, for the ill-will of the oppressor imposes upon each one the alternative of being the enemy of the oppressed if he is not that of their tyrant; evidently, it is necessary to choose to sacrifice the one who is an enemy of man; but the fact is that one finds himself forced to treat certain men as things in order to win the freedom of all.  A freedom which is occupied in denying freedom is itself so outrageous that the outrageousness of the violence which one practises against it is almost cancelled out: hatred, indignation, and anger (which even the Marxist cultivates, despite the cold impartiality of the doctrine) wipe out all scruples.  But the oppressor would not be so strong if he did not have accomplices among the oppressed themselves; mystification is one of the forms of oppression; ignorance is a situation in which man may be enclosed as narrowly as in a prison; as we have already said, every individual may practise his freedom inside his world, but not everyone has the means of rejecting, even by doubt, the values, taboos, and prescriptions by which he is surrounded; doubtless, respectful minds take the object of their respect for their own; in this sense they are responsible for it, as they are responsible for their presence in the world: but they are not guilty if their adhesion is not a resignation of their freedom.  When a young sixteen-year old Nazi died crying, “Heil Hitler!” he was not guilty, and it was not he whom we hated but his masters.  The desirable thing would be to re-educate this misled youth; it would be necessary to expose the mystification and to put the men who are its victims in the presence of their freedom.  But the urgency of the struggle forbids this slow labor.  We are obliged to destroy not only the oppressor but also those who serve him, whether they do so out of ignorance or out of constraint.  As we have also seen, the situation of the world is so complex that one can not fight everywhere at the same time and for everyone.  In order to win an urgent victory, one has to give up the idea, at least temporarily, of serving certain valid causes; one may even be brought to the point of fighting against them.  Thus, during the course of the last war, no Anti-fascist could have wanted the revolts of the natives in the British Empire to be successful; on the contrary, these revolts were supported by the Fascist regimes; and yet, we can not blame those who, considering their emancipation to be the more urgent action, took advantage of the situation to obtain it.  Thus, it is possible, and often it even happens, that one finds himself obliged to oppress and kill men who are pursuing goals whose validity one acknowledges himself.  But that is not the worst thing to be said for violence.  It not only forces us to sacrifice the men who are in our way, but also those who are fighting on our side, and even ourselves.  Since we can conquer our enemies only by acting upon their facticity, by reducing them to things, we have to make ourselves things; in this struggle in which wills are forced to confront each other through their bodies, the bodies of our allies, like those of our opponents are exposed to the same brutal hazard: they will be wounded, killed, or starved.  Every war, every revolution, demands the sacrifice of a generation, of a collectivity, by those who undertake it.  And even outside of periods of crisis when blood flows, the permanent possibility of violence can constitute between nations and classes a state of veiled warfare in which individuals are sacrificed in a permanent way.  Thus one finds himself in the presence of the paradox that no action can be generated for man without its being immediately generated against men.  This obvious truth, which is universally known, is, however, so bitter that the first concern of a doctrine of action is ordinarily to mask this element of failure that is involved in any undertaking.  The parties of oppression beg the question; they deny the value of what they sacrifice in such a way that they find that they are sacrificing nothing.  Passing dishonestly from the serious to nihilism, they set up both the unconditioned value of their end and the insignificance of the men whom they are using as instruments.  High as it may be, the number of victims is always measurable; and each one taken one by one is never anything but an individual: yet, through time and space, the triumph of the cause embraces the infinite, it interests the whole collectivity.  In order to deny the outrage it is enough to deny the importance of the individual, even though it be at the cost of this collectivity: it is everything, he is only a zero.  In one sense the individual, as a matter of fact, is not very much, and we can understand the misanthrope who in 1939 declared: “After all, when you look at people one by one, it doesn’t seem so awful a thing to make war upon them.” Reduced to pure facticity, congealed in his immanence, cut off from his future, deprived of his transcendence and of the world which that transcendence discloses, a man no longer appears as anything more than a thing among things which can be subtracted from the collectivity of other things without its leaving upon the earth any trace of its absence.  Multiply this paltry existence by thousands of copies and its insignificance remains; mathematics also teaches us that zero multipled by any finite number remains zero.  It is even possible that the wretchedness of each element is only further affirmed by this futile expansion.  Horror is sometimes self-destructive before the photographs of the charnel-houses of Buchenwald and Dachau and of the ditches strewn with bones; it takes on the aspect of indifference; that decomposed, that animal flesh seems so essentially doomed to decay that one can no longer even regret that it has fulfilled its destiny; it is when a man is alive that his death appears to be an outrage, but a corpse has the stupid tranquillity of trees and stones: those who have done it say that it is easy to walk on a corpse and still easier to walk over a pile of corpses; and it is the same reason that accounts for the callousness described by those deportees who escaped death: through sickness, pain, hunger, and death, they no longer saw their comrades and themselves as anything more than an animal horde whose life or desires were no longer justified by anything, whose very revolts were only the agitations of animals.  In order to remain capable of perceiving man through these humiliated bodies one had to be sustained by political faith, intellectual pride, or Christian charity.  That is why the Nazis were so systematically relentless in casting into abjection the men they wanted to destroy: the disgust which the victims felt in regard to themselves stifled the voice of revolt and justified the executioners in their own eyes.  All oppressive regimes become stronger through the degradation of the oppressed.  In Algeria I have seen any number of colonists appease their conscience by the contempt in which they held the Arabs who were crushed with misery: the more miserable the latter were, the more contemptible they seemed, so much so that there was never any room for remorse.  And the truth is that certain tribes in the south were so ravaged by disease and famine that one could no longer feel either rebellious or hopeful regarding them; rather, one wished for the death of those unhappy creatures who have been reduced to so elemental an animality that even the maternal instict has been suppressed in them.  Yet, with all this sordid resignation, there were children who played and laughed; and their smile exposed the lie of their oppressors: it was an appeal and a promise; it projected a future before the child, a man’s future.  If, in all oppressed countries, a child’s face is so moving, it is not that the child is more moving or that he has more of a right to happiness than the others: it is that he is the living affirmation of human transcendence: he is on the watch, he is an eager hand held out to the world, he is a hope, a project.  The trick of tyrants is to enclose a man in the immanence of his facticity and to try to forget that man is always, as Heidegger puts it, “infinitely more than what he would be if he were reduced to being what he is;” man is a being of the distances, a movement toward the future, a project.  The tyrant asserts himself as a transcendence; he considers others as pure immanences: he thus arrogates to himself the right to treat them like cattle.  We see the sophism on which his conduct is based: of the ambiguous condition which is that of all men, he retains for himself the only aspect of a transcendence which is capable of justifying itself; for the others, the contingent and unjustified aspect of immanence.  But if that kind of contempt for man is convenient, it is also dangerous; the feeling of abjection can confirm men in a hopeless resignation but can not incite them to the struggle and sacrifice which is consented to with their life; this was seen in the time of the Roman decadence when men lost their zest for life and the readiness to risk it.  In any case, the tyrant himself does not openly set up this contempt as a universal principle: it is the Jew, the negro, or the native whom he encloses in his immanence; with his subordinates and his soldiers he uses different language.  For it is quite clear that if the individual is a pure zero, the sum of those zeros which make up the collectivity is also a zero: no undertaking has any importance, no defeat as well as no victory.  In order to appeal to the devotion of his troops, the chief or the authoritarian party will utilize a truth which is the opposite of the one which sanctions their brutal oppression: namely, that the value of the individual is asserted only in his surpassing.  This is one of the aspects of the doctrine of Hegel which the dictatorial regimes readily make use of.  And it is a point at which fascist ideology and Marxist ideology converge.  A doctrine which aims at the liberation of man evidently can not rest on a contempt for the individual; but it can propose to him no other salvation than his subordination to the collectivity.  The finite is nothing if it is not its transition to the infinite; the death of an individual is not a failure if it is integrated into a project which surpasses the limits of life, the substance of this life being outside of the individual himself, in the class, in the socialist State; if the individual is taught to consent to his sacrifice, the latter is abolished as such, and the soldier who has renounced himself in favor of his cause will die joyfully; in fact, that is how the young Hitlerians died.  We know how many edifying speeches this philosophy has inspired: it is by losing oneself that one finds himself, by dying that one fulfills his life, by accepting servitude that one realizes his freedom; all leaders of men preach in this vein.  And if there are any who refuse to heed this language, they are wrong, they are cowards: as such, they are worthless, they aren’t worth anyone’s bothering with them.  The brave man dies gaily, of his own free will; the one who rejects death deserves only to die.  There you have the problem elegantly resolved.  But one may ask whether this convenient solution is not self-contesting.  In Hegel the individual is only an abstract moment in the History of absolute Mind.  This is explained by the first intuition of the system which, identifying the real and the rational, empties the human world of its sensible thickness; if the truth of the here and now is only Space and Time, if the truth of one’s cause is its passage into the other, then the attachment to the individual substance of life is evidently an error, an inadequate attitude.  The essential moment of Hegelian ethics is the moment when consciousnesses recognize one another;in this operation the other is recognized as identical with me, which means that in myself it is the universal truth of my self which alone is recognized; so individuality is denied, and it can no longer reappear except on the natural and contingent plane; moral salvation will lie in my surpassing toward that other who is equal to myself and who in turn will surpass himself toward another.  Hegel himself recognizes that if this passage continued indefinitely, Totality would never be achieved, the real would peter out in the same measure: one can not, without absurdity, indefinitely sacrifice each generation to the following one; human history would then be only an endless succession of negations which would never return to the positive; all action would be destruction and life would be a vain flight.  We must admit that there will be a recovery of the real and that all sacrifices will find their positive form within the absolute Mind.  But this does not work without some difficulty.  The Mind is a subject; but who is a subject? After Descartes how can we ignore the fact that subjectivity radically signifies separation? And if it is admitted, at the cost of a contradiction, that the subject will be the men of the future reconciled, it must be clearly recognized that the men of today who turn out to have been the substance of the real, and not subjects, remain excluded forever from this reconciliation.  Furthermore, even Hegel retreats from the idea of this motionless future; since Mind is restlessness, the dialectic of struggle and conciliation can never be stopped: the future which it envisages is not the perpetual peace of Kant but an indefinite state of war.  It declares that this war will no longer appear as a temporary evil in which each individual makes a gift of himself to the State; but it is precisely at this point that there is a bit of sleight-of-hand: for why would he agree to this gift since the State can not be the achieving of the real, Totality recovering itself? The whole system seems like a huge mystification, since it subordinates all its moments to an end term whose coming it dares not set up; the individual renounces himself; but no reality in favor of which he can renounce himself is ever affirmed or recovered.  Through all this learned dialectic we finally come back to the sophism which we exposed: if the individual is nothing, society can not be something.  Take his substance away from him, and the State has no more substance; if he has nothing to sacrifice, there is nothing before him to sacrifice to.  Hegelian fullness immediately passes into the nothingness of absence.  And the very grandeur of that failure makes this truth shine forth: only the subject can justify his own existence; no external subject, no object, can bring him salvation from the outside.  He can not be regarded as a nothing, since the consciousness of all things is within him.  Thus, nihilistic pessimism and rationalistic optimism fail in their effort to juggle away the bitter truth of sacrifice: they also eliminate all reasons for wanting it.  Someone told a young invalid who wept because she had to leave her home, her occupations, and her whole past life, “Get cured.  The rest has no importance.” “But if nothing has any importance,” she answered, “what good is it to get cured?” She was right.  In order for this world to have any importance, in order for our undertaking to have a meaning and to be worthy of sacrifices, we must affirm the concrete and particular thickness of this world and the individual reality of our projects and ourselves.  This is what democratic societies understand; they strive to confirm citizens in the feeling of their individual value; the whole ceremonious apparatus of baptism, marriage, and burial is the collectivity’s homage to the individual; and the rites of justice seek to manifest society’s respect for each of its members considered in his particularity.  After or during a period of violence when men are treated like objects, one is astonished, even irritated, at seeing human life rediscover, in certain cases, a sacred character.  Why those hesitations of the courts, those long drawn-out trials, since men died by the million, like animals, since the very ones being judged coldly massacred them? The reason is that once the period of crisis, in which the democracies themselves, whether they liked it or not, had to resort to blind violence, has passed, they aim to re-establish the individual within his rights; more than ever they must restore to their members the sense of their dignity, the sense of the dignity of each man, taken one by one; the soldier must become a citizen again so that the city may continue to subsist as such, may continue to deserve one’s dedicating oneself to it.  But if the individual is set up as a unique and irreducible value, the word sacrifice regains all its meaning; what a man loses in renouncing his plans, his future, and his life no longer appears as a negligible thing.  Even if he decides that in order to justify his life he must consent to limiting its course, even if he accepts dying, there is a wrench at the heart of this acceptance, for freedom demands both that it recover itself as an absolute and that it prolong its movement indefinitely: it is through this indefinite movement that it desires to come back to itself and to confirm itself; now, death puts an end to his drive; the hero can transcend death toward a future fulfillment, but he will not be present in that future; this must be understood if one wishes to restore to heroism its true worth: it is neither natural nor easy; the hero may overcome his regret and carry out his sacrifice; the latter is none the less an absolute renunciation.  The death of those to whom we are attached by particular ties will also be consented to as an individual and irreducible misfortune.  A collectivist conception of man does not concede a valid existence to such sentiments as love, tenderness, and friendship; the abstract identity of individuals merely authorizes a comradeship between them by means of which each one is likened to each of the others.  In marching, in choral singing, in common work and struggle, all the others appear as the same; nobody ever dies.  On the contrary, if individuals recognize themselves in their differences, individual relations are established among them, and each one becomes irreplaceable for a few others.  And violence does not merely provoke in the world the wrench of the sacrifice to which one has consented; it is also undergone in revolt and refusal.  Even the one who desires a victory and who knows that it has to be paid for will wonder: why with my blood rather than with another’s? Why is it my son who is dead? And we have seen that every struggle obliges us to sacrifice people whom our victory does not concern, people who, in all honesty, reject it as a cataclysm: these people will die in astonishment, anger or despair.  Undergone as a misfortune, violence appears as a crime to the one who practices it.  That is why Saint-Just, who believed in the individual and who knew that all authority is violence, said with somber lucidity, “No one governs innocently.” We may well assume that not all those who govern have the courage to make such a confession; and furthermore it might be dangerous for them to make it too loudly.  They try to mask the crime from themselves; at least they try to conceal it from the notice of those who submit to their law.  If they can not totally deny it, they attempt to justify it.  The most radical justification would be to demonstrate that it is necessary: it then ceases to be a crime, it becomes fatality.  Even if an end is posited as necessary, the contingency of the means renders the chief’s decisions arbitrary, and each individual suffering appears as unjustified: why this bloody revolution instead of slow reforms? And who will dare to designate the victim who is anonymously demanded by the general plan? On the contrary, if only one way shows itself to be possible, if the unrolling of history is fatal, there is no longer any place for the anguish of choice, or for regret, or for outrage; revolt can no longer surge up in any heart.  This is what makes historical materialism so reassuring a doctrine; the troublesome idea of a subjective caprice or an objective chance is thereby eliminated.  The thought and the voice of the directors merely reflect the fatal exigences of History.  But in order that this faith be living and efficacious, it is necessary that no reflection mediatize the subjectivity of the chiefs and make it appear as such; if the chief considers that he does not simply reflect the given situation but that he is interpreting it, he becomes a prey to anguish: who am I to believe in myself? And if the soldier’s eyes open, he too asks: who is he to command me? Instead of a prophet, he sees nothing more than a tyrant.  That is why every authoritarian party regards thought as a danger and reflection as a crime; it is by means of thought that crime appears as such in the world.  This is one of the meanings of Koestler’s Darkness at Noon.  Roubatchov easily slips into confession because he feels that hesitation and doubt are the most radical, the most unpardonable of faults; they undermine the world of objectivity much more than does an act of capricious disobedience.  Yet, however cruel the yoke may be, in spite of the purges, murders, and deportations, every regime has opponents: there are reflection, doubt, and contestation.  And even if the opponent is in the wrong, his error brings to light a truth, namely, that there is a place in this world for error and subjectivity; whether he is right or wrong, he triumphs; he shows that the men who are in power may also be mistaken.  And furthermore, the latter know it; they know that they hesitate and that their decisions are risky.  The doctrine of necessity is much more a weapon than a faith; and if they use it, they do so because they know well enough that the soldier may act otherwise than he does, otherwise than the way they want him to, that he may disobey; they know well enough that he is free and that they are fettering his freedom.  It is the first sacrifice that they impose upon him: in order to achieve the liberation of men he has to give up his own freedom, even his freedom of thought.  In order to mask the violence, what they do is to have recourse to a new violence which even invades his mind.  Very well, replies the partisan who is sure of his aims, but this violence is useful.  And the justification which he here invokes is that which, in the most general way, inspires and legitimizes all action.  From conservatives to revolutionaries, through idealistic and moral vocabularies or realistic and positive ones, the outrageousness of violence is excused in the name of utility.  It does not much matter that the action is not fatally commanded by anterior events as long as it is called for by the proposed end; this end sets up the means which are subordinated to it; and thanks to this subordination, one can perhaps not avoid sacrifice but one can legitimize it: this is what is important to the man of action; like Saint-Just, he accepts the loss of his innocence.  It is the arbitrariness of the crime that is repugnant to him more than the crime itself.  If the sacrifices which have been assented to find their rational place within the enterprise, one escapes from the anguish of decision and from remorse.  But one has to win out; defeat would change the murders and destruction into unjustified outrage, since they would have been carried out in vain; but victory gives meaning and utility to all the misfortunes which have helped bring it about.  Such a position would be solid and satisfactory if the word useful had an absolute meaning in itself; as we have seen, the characteristic of the spirit of seriousness is precisely to confer a meaning upon it by raising the Thing or the Cause to the dignity of an unconditioned end.  The only problem then raised is a technical problem; the means will be chosen according to their effectiveness, their speed, and their economy; it is simply a question of measuring the relationships of the factors of time, cost, and probability of success.  Furthermore, in war-time discipline spares the subordinates the problems of such calculations; they concern only the staff.  The soldier does not call into question cither the aim or the means of attaining it: he obeys without any discussion.  However, what distinguishes war and politics from all other techniques is that the material that is employed is a human material.  Now human efforts and lives can no more be treated as blind instruments than human work can be treated as simple merchandise; at the same time as he is a means for attaining an end, man is himself an end.  The word useful requires a complement, and there can be only one: man himself.  And the most disciplined soldier would mutiny if skillful propaganda did not persuade him that he is dedicating himself to the cause of man: to his cause.  But is the cause of Man that of each man? That is what utilitarian ethics has been striving to demonstrate since Hegel; if one wishes to give the word useful a universal and absolute meaning, it is always a question of reabsorbing each man into the bosom of mankind; it is said that despite the weaknesses of the flesh and that particular fear which each one experiences in the face of his particular death, the real interest of each one is mingled with the general interest.  And it is true that each is bound to all; but that is precisely the ambiguity of his condition: in his surpassing toward others, each one exists absolutely as for himself; each is interested in the liberation of all, but as a separate existence engaged in his own projects.  So much so that the terms “useful to Man,” “useful to this man,” do not overlap.  Universal, absolute man exists nowhere.  From this angle, we again come upon the same antinomy: the only justification of sacrifice is its utility; but the useful is what serves Man.  Thus, in order to serve some men we must do disservice to others.  By what principle are we to choose between them? It must again be called to mind that the supreme end at which man must aim is his freedom, which alone is capable of establishing the value of every end; thus, comfort, happiness, all relative goods which human projects define, will be subordinated to this absolute condition of realization.  The freedom of a single man must count more than a cotton or rubber harvest; although this principle is not respected in fact, it is usually recognized theoretically.  But what makes the problem so difficult is that it is a matter of choosing between the negation of one freedom or another: every war supposes a discipline, every revolution a dictatorship, every political move a certain amount of lying; action implies all forms of enslaving, from murder to mystification.  Is it therefore absurd in every case? Or, in spite of everything, are we able to find, within the very outrage that it implies, reasons for wanting one thing rather than another? One generally takes numerical considerations into account by a strange compromise which clearly shows that every action treats men both as a means and as an end, as an external object and as an inwardness; it is better to save the lives of ten men than of only one.  Thus, one treats man as an end, for to set up quantity as a value is to set up the positive value of each unit; but it is setting it up as a quantifiable value, thus, as an externality.  I have known a Kantian rationalist who pas sionately maintained that it is as inmoral to choose the death of a single man as to let ten thousand die; he was right in the sense that in each murder the outrage is total; ten thousand dead — there are never ten thousand copies of a single death; no multiplication is relevant to subjectivity.  But he forgot that for the one who had the decision to make men are given, nevertheless, as objects that can be counted; it is therefore logical, though this logic implies an outrageous absurdity, to prefer the salvation of the greater number.  Moreover, this position of the problem is rather abstract, for one rarely bases a choice on pure quantity.  Those men among whom one hesitates have functions in society.  The general who is sparing of the lives of his soldiers saves them as human material that it is useful to save for tomorrow’s battles or for the reconstruction of the country; and he sometimes condemns to death thousands of civilians whose fate he is not concerned with in order to spare the lives of a hundred soldiers or ten specialists.  An extreme case is the one David Rousset describes in The Days of Our Death: the S.S.  obliged the responsible members of the concentration camps to designate which prisoners were to go to the gas chambers.  The politicians agreed to assume this responsibility because they thought that they had a valid principle of selection: they protected the politicians of their party because the lives of these men who were devoted to a cause which they thought was just seemed to them to be the most useful to preserve.  We know that the communists have been widely accused of this partiality; however, since one could in no way escape the atrocity of these massacres, the only thing to do was to try, as far as possible, to rationalize it.  It seems as if we have hardly advanced, for we come back, in the end, to the statement that what appears as useful is to sacrifice the less useful men to the more useful.  But even this shift from useful to useful will enlighten us: the complement of the word useful is the word man; but it is also the word future.  It is man insofar as he is, according to the formula of Ponge, “the future of man.” Indeed, cut off from his transcendence, reduced to the facticity of his presence, an individual is nothing; it is by his project that he fulfills himself, by the end at which he aims that he justifies himself; thus, this justification is always to come.  Only the future can take the present for its own and keep it alive by surpassing it.  A choicewill become possible in the light of the future, which is the meaning of tomorrow because the present appears as the facticity which must be transcended toward freedom.  No action is conceivable without this sovereign affirmation of the future.  But we still have to agree upon what underlies this word.  4.  THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE The word future has two meanings corresponding to the two aspects of the ambiguous condition of man which is lack of being and which is existence; it alludes to both being and existence.  When I envisage my future, I consider that movement which, prolonging my existence of today, will fulfill my present projects and will surpass them toward new ends: the future is the definite direction of a particular transcendence and it is so closely bound up with the present that it composes with it a single temporal form; this is the future which Heidegger considered as a reality which is given at each moment.  But through the centuries men have dreamed of another future in which it might be granted them to retrieve themselves as beings in Glory, Happiness, or Justice; this future did not prolong the present; it came down upon the world like a cataclysm announced by signs which cut the continuity of time: by a Messiah, by meteors, by the trumpets of the Last Judgment.  By transporting the kingdom of God to heaven, Christians have almost stripped it of its temporal character, although it was promised to the believer only at the end of his life.  It was the anti-Christian humanism of the eighteenth century which brought the myth down to earth again.  Then, through the idea of progress, an idea of the future was elaborated in which its two aspects fused: the future appeared both as the meaning of our transcendence and as the immobility of being; it is human, terrestial, and the resting-place of things.  It is in this form that it is hesitantly reflected in the systems of Hegel and of Comte.  It is in this form that it is so often invoked today as a unity of the World or as a finished socialist State.  In both cases the Future appears as both the infinite and as Totality, as number and as unity of conciliation; it is the abolition of the negative, it is fulness, happiness.  One might surmise that any sacrifice already made might be claimed in its name.  However great the quantity of men sacrificed today, the quantity that will profit by their sacrifice is infinitely greater; on the other hand, in the face of the positivity of the future, the present is only the negative which must be eliminated as such: only by dedicating itself to this positivity can the negative henceforth return to the positive.  The present is the transitory existence which is made in order to be abolished: it retrieves itself only by transcending itself toward the permanence of future being; it is only as an instrument, as a means, it is only by its efficacity with regard to the coming of the future that the present is validly realized: reduced to itself it is nothing, one may dispose of it as he pleases.  That is the ultimate meaning of the formula: the end justifies the means: all means are authorized by their very indifference.  Thus, some serenely think that the present oppression has no importance if, through it, the World can be fulfilled as such: then, within the harmonious equilibrium of work and wealth, oppression will be wiped out by itself.  Others serenely think that the present dictatorship of a party with its lies and violence has no importance if, by means of it, the socialist State is realized: arbitrariness and crime will then disappear forever from the face of the earth.  And still others think more sloppily that the shilly-shallyings and the compromises have no importance since the future will turn out well and, in some way or other, will muddle along into victory.  Those who project themselves toward a Future-Thing and submerge their freedom in it find the tranquillity of the serious.  However, we have seen that, despite the requirements of his system, even Hegel does not dare delude himself with the idea of a stationary future; he admits that, mind being restlessness, the struggle will never cease.  Marx did not consider the coming of the socialist state as an absolute result, but as the end of a pre-history on the basis of which real history begins.  However, it would be sufficient, in order for the myth of the future to be valid, for this history to be conceivable as a harmonious development where reconciled men would fulfill themselves as a pure positivity; but this dream is not permitted since man is originally a negativity.  No social upheaval, no moral conversion can eliminate this lack which is in his heart; it is by making himself a lack of being that man exists, and positive existence is this lack assumed but not eliminated; we can not establish upon existence an abstract wisdom which, turning itself away from being, would aim at only the harmony itself of the existants: for it is then the absolute silence of the in-itself which would close up around this negation of negativity; without this particular movement which thrusts him toward the future man would not exist.  But then one can not imagine any reconciliation of transcendences: they do not have the indifferent docility of a pure abstraction; they are concrete and concretely compete with others for being.  The world which they reveal is a battle-field where there is no neutral ground and which cannot be divided up into parcels: for each individual project is asserted through the world as a whole.  The fundamental ambiguity of the human condition will always open up to men the possibility of opposing choices; there will always be within them the desire to be that being of whom they have made themselves a lack, the flight from the anguish of freedom; the plane of hell, of struggle, will never be eliminated; freedom will never be given; it will always have to be won: that is what Trotsky was saying when he envisaged the future as a permanent revolution.  Thus, there is a fallacy hidden in that abuse of language which all parties make use of today to justify their politics when they declare that the world is still at war.  If one means by that that the struggle is not over, that the world is a prey to opposed interests which affront each other violently, he is speaking the truth; but he also means that such a situation is abnormal and calls for abnormal behavior; the politics that it involves can impugn every moral principle, since it has only a provisional form: later on we shall act in accordance with truth and justice.  To the idea of present war there is opposed that of a future peace when man will again find, along with a stable situation, the possibility of a morality.  But the truth is that if division and violence define war, the world has always been at war and always will be; if man is waiting for universal peace in order to establish his existence validly, he will wait indefinitely: there will never be any other future.  It is possible that some may challenge this assertion as being based upon debatable ontological presuppositions; it should at least be recognized that this harmonious future is only an uncertain dream and that in any case it is not ours.  Our hold on the future is limited; the movement of expansion of existence requires that we strive at every moment to amplify it; but where it stops our future stops too; beyond, there is nothing more because nothing more is disclosed.  From that formless night we can draw no justification of our acts, it condemns them with the same indifference; wiping out today’s errors and defeats, it will also wipe out its triumphs; it can be chaos or death as well as paradise: perhaps men will one day return to barbarism, perhaps one day the earth will no longer be anything but an icy planet.  In this perspective all moments are lost in the indistinctness of nothingness and being.  Man ought not entrust the care of his salvation to this uncertain and foreign future: it is up to him to assure it within his own existence; this existence is conceivable, as we have said, only as an affirmation of the future, but of a human future, a finite future.  It is difficult today to safeguard this sense of finiteness.  The Greek cities and the Roman republic were able to will themselves in their finiteness because the infinite which invested them was for them only darkness; they died because of this ignorance, but they also lived by it.  Today, however, we are having a hard time living because we are so bent on outwitting death.  We are aware that the whole world is interested in each of our undertakings and this spatial enlargement of our projects also governs their temporal dimension; by a paradoxical symmetry, whereas an individual accords great value to one day of his life, and a city to one year, the interests of the World are computed in centuries; the greater the human density that one envisages, the more the viewpoint of externality wins over that of internality, and the idea of externality carries with it that of quantity.  Thus, the scales of measurement have changed; space and time have expanded about us: today it is a small matter that a million men and a century seem to us only a provisional moment; yet, the individual is not touched by this transformation, his life keeps the same rhythm, his death does not retreat before him; he extends his control of the world by instruments which enable him to devour distances and to multiply the output of his effort in time; but he is always only one.  However, instead of accepting his limits, he tries to do away with them.  He aspires to act upon everything and by knowing everything.  Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries there developed the dream of a universal science which, manifesting the solidarity of the parts of the whole also admitted a universal power; it was a dream “dreamed by reason,” as Valery puts it, but which was none the less hollow, like all dreams.  For a scientist who would aspire to know everything about a phenomenon would dissolve it within the totality; and a man who would aspire to act upon the totality of the Universe would see the meaning of all action vanish.  Just as the infinity spread out before my gaze contracts above my head into a blue ceiling, so my transcendence heaps up in the distance the opaque thickness of the future; but between sky and earth there is a perceptional field with its forms and colors; and it is in the interval which separates me today from an unforeseeable future that there are meanings and ends toward which to direct my acts.  As soon as one introduces the presence of the finite individual into the world, a presence without which there is no world, finite forms stand out through time and space.  And in reverse, though a landscape is not only a transition but a particular object, an event is not only a passage but a particular reality.  If one denies with Hegel the concrete thickness of the here and now in favor of universal space-time, if one denies the separate consciousness in favor of Mind, one misses with Hegel the truth of the world.  It is no more necessary to regard History as a rational totality than to regard the Universe as such.  Man, mankind, the universe, and history are, in Sartre’s expression, “detotalized totalities,” that is, separation does not exclude relation, nor vice-versa.  Society exists only by means of the existence of particular individuals; likewise, human adventures stand out against the background of time, each finite to each, though they are all open to the infinity of the future and their individual forms thereby imply each other without destroying each other.  A conception of this kind does not contradict that of a historical unintelligibility; for it is not true that the mind has to choose between the contingent absurdity of the discontinuous and the rationalistic necessity of the continuous; on the contrary, it is part of its function to make a multiplicity of coherent ensembles stand out against the unique background of the world and, inversely, to comprehend these ensembles in the perspective of an ideal unity of the world.  Without raising the question of historical comprehension and causality it is enough to recognize the presence of intelligible sequences within temporal forms so that forecasts and consequently action may be possible.  In fact, whatever may be the philosophy we adhere to, whether our uncertainty manifests an objective and fundamental contingency or whether it expresses our subjective ignorance in the face of a rigorous necessity, the practical attitude remains the same; we must decide upon the opportuneness of an act and attempt to measure its effectiveness without knowing all the factors that are present.  Just as the scientist, in order to know a phenomenon, does not wait for the light of completed knowledge to break upon it; on the contrary, in illuminating the phenomenon, he helps establish the knowledge: in like manner, the man of action, in order to make a decision, will not wait for a perfect knowledge to prove to him the necessity of a certain choice; he must first choose and thus help fashion history.  A choice of this kind is no more arbitrary than a hypothesis; it excludes neither reflection nor even method; but it is also free, and it implies risks that must be assumed as such.  The movement of the mind, whether it be called thought or will, always starts up in the darkness.  And at bottom it matters very little, practically speaking, whether there is a Science of history or not, since this Science can come to light only at the end of the future and since at each particular moment we must, in any case, maneuver in a state of doubt.  The communists themselves admit that it is subjectively possible for them to be mistaken despite the strict dialectic of History.  The latter is not revealed to them today in its finished form; they are obliged to foresee its development, and this foresight may be erroneous.  Thus, from the political and tactical point of view there will be no difference between a doctrine of pure dialectical necessity and a doctrine which leaves room for contingency; the difference is of a moral order.  For, in the first case one admits a retrieval of each moment in the future, and thus one does not aspire to justify it by itself; in the second case, each undertaking, involving only a finite future, must be lived in its finiteness and considered as an absolute which no unknown time will ever succeed in saving.  In fact, the one who asserts the unity of history also recognizes that distinct ensembles stand out within it; and the one who emphasizes the particularity of these ensembles admits that they all project against a single horizon; just as for all there exist both individuals and a collectivity; the affirmation of the collectivity over against the individual is opposed, not on the plane of fact, but on the moral plane, to the assertion of a collectivity of individuals each existing for himself.  The case is the same in what concerns time and its moments, and just as we believe that by denying each individual one by one, one eliminates the collectivity, we think that if man gives himself up to an indefinite pursuit of the future he will lose his existence without ever recovering it; he then resembles a madman who runs after his shadow.  The means, it is said, will be justified by the end; but it is the means which define it, and if it is contradicted at the moment that it is set up, the whole enterprise sinks into absurdity.  In this way the attitude of England in regard to Spain, Greece, and Palestine is defended with the pretext that she must take up position against the Russian menace in order to save, along with her own existence, her civilization and the values of democracy; but a democracy which defends itself only by acts of oppression equivalent to those of authoritarian regimes, is precisely denying all these values; whatever the virtues of a civilization may be, it immediately belies them if it buys them by means of injustice and tyranny.  Inversely, if the justifying end is thrown ahead to the farthermost end of a mythical future, it is no longer a reflection upon the means; being nearer and clearer, the means itself becomes the goal aimed at; it blocks the horizon without, however, being deliberately wanted.  The triumph of Russia is proposed as a means of liberating the international proletariat; but has it not become an absolute end for all Stalinists? The end justifies the means only if it remains present, if it is completely disclosed in the course of the present enterprise.  And as a matter of fact, if it is true that men seek in the future a guarantee of their success, a negation of their failures, it is true that they also feel the need of denying the indefinite flight of time and of holding their present between their hands.  Existence must be asserted in the present if one does not want all life to be defined as an escape toward nothingness.  That is the reason societies institute festivals whose role is to stop the movement of transcendence, to set up the end as an end.  The hours following the liberation of Paris, for example, were an immense collective festival exalting the happy and absolute end of that particular history which was precisely the occupation of Paris.  There were at the moment worried spirits who were already surpassing the present toward future difficulties; they refused to rejoice under the pretext that new problems were going to come up immediately; but this ill-humor was met with only among those who had very slight wish to see the Germans defeated.  All those who had made this combat their combat, even if only by the sincerity of their hopes, also regarded the victory as an absolute victory, whatever the future might be.  Nobody was so naive as not to know that unhappiness would soon find other forms; but this particular unhappiness was wiped off the earth, absolutely.  That is the modern meaning of the festival, private as well as public.  Existence attempts in the festival to confirm itself positively as existence.  That is why, as Bataille has shown, it is characterized by destruction; the ethics of being is the ethics of saving: by storing up, one aims at the stationary plenitude of the in-itself, existence, on the contrary, is consumption; it makes itself only by destroying; the festival carries out this negative movement in order to indicate clearly its independence in relationship to the thing: one eats, drinks, lights fires, breaks things, and spends time and money; one spends them for nothing.  The spending is also a matter of establishing a communication of the existants, for it is by the movement of recognition which goes from one to the other that existence is confirmed; in songs, laughter, dances, eroticism, and drunkenness one seeks both an exaltation of the moment and a complicity with other men.  But the tension of existence realized as a pure negativity can not maintain itself for long; it must be immediately engaged in a new undertaking, it must dash off toward the future.  The moment of detachment, the pure affirmation of the subjective present are only abstractions; the joy becomes exhausted, drunkenness subsides into fatigue, and one finds himself with his hands empty because one can never possess the present: that is what gives festivals their pathetic and deceptive character.  One of art’s roles is to fix this passionate assertion of existence in a more durable way: the festival is at the origin of the theatre, music, the dance, and poetry.  In telling a story, in depicting it, one makes it exist in its particularity with its beginning and its end, its glory or its shame; and this is the way it actually must be lived.  In the festival, in art, men express their need to feel that they exist absolutely.  They must really fulfill this wish.  What stops them is that as soon as they give the word “end” its double meaning of goal and fulfillment they clearly perceive this ambiguity of their condition, which is the most fundamental of all: that every living movement is a sliding toward death.  But if they are willing to look it in the face they also discover that every movement toward death is life.  In the past people cried out, “The king is dead, long live the king;” thus the present must die so that it may live; existence must not deny this death which it carries in its heart; it must assert itself as an absolute in its very finiteness; man fulfills himself within the transitory or not at all.  He must regard his undertakings as finite and will them absolutely.  It is obvious that this finiteness is not that of the pure instant; we have said that the future was the meaning and the substance of all action; the limits can not be marked out a priori; there are projects which define the future of a day or of an hour; and there are others which are inserted into structures capable of being developed through one, two, or several centuries, and thereby they have a concrete hold on one or two or several centuries.  When one fights for the emancipation of oppressed natives, or the socialist revolution, he is obviously aiming at a long range goal; and he is still aiming at it concretely, beyond his own death, through the movement, the league, the institutions, or the party that he has helped set up.  What we maintain is that one must not expect that this goal be justified as a point of departure of a new future; insofar as we no longer have a hold on the time which will flow beyond its coming, we must not expect anything of that time for which we have worked; other men will have to live its joys and sorrows.  As for us, the goal must be considered as an end; we have to justify it on the basis of our freedom which has projected it, by the ensemble of the movement which ends in its fulfillment.  The tasks we have set up for ourselves and which, though exceeding the limits of our lives, are ours, must find their meaning in themselves and not in a mythical Historical end.  But then, if we reject the idea of a future-myth in order to retain only that of a living and finite future, one which delimits transitory forms, we have not removed the antinomy of action; the present sacrifices and failures no longer seem compensated for in any point of time.  And utility can no longer be defined absolutely.  Thus, are we not ending by condemning action as criminal and absurd though at the same time condemning man to action? 5.  AMBIGUITY The notion of ambiguity must not be confused with that of absurdity.  To declare that existence is absurd is to deny that it can ever be given a meaning; to say that it is ambiguous is to assert that its meaning is never fixed, that it must be constantly won.  Absurdity challenges every ethics; but also the finished rationalization of the real would leave no room for ethics; it is because man’s condition is ambiguous that he seeks, through failure and outrageousness, to save his existence.  Thus, to say that action has to be lived in its truth, that is, in the consciousness of the antinomies which it involves, does not mean that one has to renounce it.  In Plutarch Lied Pierrefeu rightly says that in war there is no victory which can not be regarded as unsuccessful, for the objective which one aims at is the total annihilation of the enemy and this result is never attained; yet there are wars which are won and wars which are lost.  So is it with any activity; failure and success are two aspects of reality which at the start are not perceptible.  That is what makes criticism so easy and art so difficult: the critic is always in a good position to show the limits that every artist gives himself in choosing himself; painting is not given completely either in Giotto or Titian or Cezanne; it is sought through the centuries and is never finished; a painting in which all pictorial problems are resolved is really inconceivable; painting itself is this movement toward its own reality; it is not the vain displacement of a millstone turning in the void; it concretizes itself on each canvas as an absolute existence.  Art and science do not establish themselves despite failure but through it; which does not prevent there being truths and errors, masterpieces and lemons, depending upon whether the discovery or the painting has or has not known how to win the adherence of human consciousnesses; this amounts to saying that failure, always ineluctable, is in certain cases spared and in others not.  It is interesting to pursue this comparison; not that we are likening action to a work of art or a scientific theory, but because in any case human transcendence must cope with the same problem: it has to found itself, though it is prohibited from ever fulfilling itself.  Now, we know that neither science nor art ever leaves it up to the future to justify its present existence.  In no age does art consider itself as something which is paving the way for Art: so-called archaic art prepares for classicism only in the eyes of archaeologists; the sculptor who fashioned the Korai of Athens rightfully thought that he was producing a finished work of art; in no age has science considered itself as partial and lacunary; without believing itself to be definitive, it has however, always wanted to be a total expression of the world, and it is in its totality that in each age it again raises the question of its own validity.  There we have an example of how man must, in any event, assume his finiteness: not by treating his existence as transitory or relative but by reflecting the infinite within it, that is, by treating it as absolute.  There is an art only because at every moment art has willed itself absolutely; likewise there is a liberation of man only if, in aiming at itself, freedom is achieved absolutely in the very fact of aiming at itself.  This requires that each action be considered as a finished form whose different moments, instead of fleeing toward the future in order to find there their justification, reflect and confirm one another so well that there is no longer a sharp separation between present and future, between means and ends.  But if these moments constitute a unity, there must be no contradiction among them.  Since the liberation aimed at is not a thing situated in an unfamiliar time, but a movement which realizes itself by tending to conquer, it can not attain itself if it denies itself at the start; action can not seek to fulfill itself by means which would destroy its very meaning.  So much so that in certain situations there will be no other issue for man than rejection.  In what is called political realism there is no room for rejection because the present is considered as transitory; there is rejection only if man lays claim in the present to his existence as an absolute value; then he must absolutely reject what would deny this value.  Today, more or less consciously in the name of such an ethics, we condemn a magistrate who handed over a communist to save ten hostages and along with him all the Vichyites who were trying “to make the best of things:” it was not a matter of rationalizing the present such as it was imposed by the German occupation, but of rejecting it unconditionally.  The resistance did not aspire to a positive effectiveness; it was a negation, a revolt, a martyrdom; and in this negative movement freedom was positively and absolutely confirmed.  In one sense the negative attitude is easy; the rejected object is given unequivocally and unequivocally defines the revolt that one opposes to it; thus, all French antifascists were united during the occupation by their common resistance to a single oppressor.  The return to the positive encounters many more obstacles, as we have well seen in France where divisions and hatreds were revived at the same time as were the parties.  In the moment of rejection, the antinomy of action is removed, and means and end meet; freedom immediately sets itself up as its own goal and fulfills itself by so doing.  But the antinomy reappears as soon as freedom again gives itself ends which are far off in the future; then, through the resistances of the given, divergent means offer themselves and certain ones come to be seen as contrary to their ends.  It has often been observed that revolt alone is pure.  Every construction implies the outrage of dictatorship, of violence.  This is the theme, among others, of Koestler’s Gladiators.  Those who, like this symbolic Spartacus, do not want to retreat from the outrage and resign themselves to impotence, usually seek refuge in the values of seriousness.  That is why, among individuals as well as collectivities, the negative moment is often the most genuine.  Goethe, Barres, and Aragon, disdainful or rebellious in their romantic youth, shattered old conformisms and thereby proposed a real, though incomplete, liberation.  But what happened later on? Goethe became a servant of the state, Barres of nationalism, and Aragon of Stalinist conformism.  We know how the seriousness of the Catholic Church was substituted for the Christian spirit, which was a rejection of dead Law, a subjective rapport of the individual with God through faith and charity; the Reformation was a revolt of subjectivity, but Protestantism in turn changed into an objective moralism in which the seriousness of works replaced the restlessness of faith.  As for revolutionary humanism, it accepts only rarely the tension of permanent liberation; it has created a Church where salvation is bought by membership in a party as it is bought elsewhere by baptism and indulgences.  We have seen that this recourse to the serious is a lie; it entails the sacrifice of man to the Thing, of freedom to the Cause.  In order for the return to the positive to be genuine it must involve negativity, it must not conceal the antinomies between means and end, present and future; they must be lived in a permanent tension; one must retreat from neither the outrage of violence nor deny it, or, which amounts to the same thing, assume it lightly.  Kierkegaard has said that what distinguishes the pharisee from the genuinely moral man is that the former considers his anguish as a sure sign of his virtue; from the fact that he asks himself, “Am I Abraham?” he concludes, “I am Abraham;” but morality resides in the painfulness of an indefinite questioning.  The problem which we are posing is not the same as that of Kierkegaard; the important thing to us is to know whether, in given conditions, Isaac must be killed or not.  But we also think that what distinguishes the tyrant from the man of good will is that the first rests in the certainty of his aims, whereas the second keeps asking himself, “Am I really working for the liberation of men? Isn’t this end contested by the sacrifices through which I aim at it?” In setting up its ends, freedom must put them in parentheses, confront them at each moment with that absolute end which it itself constitutes, and contest, in its own name, the means it uses to win itself.  It will be said that these considerations remain quite abstract.  What must be done, practically? Which action is good? Which is bad? To ask such a question is also to fall into a naive abstraction.  We don’t ask the physicist, “Which hypotheses are true?” Nor the artist, “By what procedures does one produce a work whose beauty is guaranteed?” Ethics does not furnish recipes any more than do science and art.  One can merely propose methods.  Thus, in science the fundamental problem is to make the idea adequate to its content and the law adequate to the facts; the logician finds that in the case where the pressure of the given fact bursts the concept which serves to comprehend it, one is obliged to invent another concept; but he can not define a priori the moment of invention, still less foresee it.  Analogously, one may say that in the case where the content of the action falsifies its meaning, one must modify not the meaning, which is here willed absolutely, but the content itself; however, it is impossible to determine this relationship between meaning and content abstractly and universally: there must be a trial and decision in each case.  But likewise just as the physicist finds it profitable to reflect on the conditions of scientific invention and the artist on those of artistic creation without expecting any ready-made solutions to come from these reflections, it is useful for the man of action to find out under what conditions his undertakings are valid.  We are going to see that on this basis new perspectives are disclosed.  In the first place, it seems to us that the individual as such is one of the ends at which our action must aim.  Here we are at one with the point of view of Christian charity, the Epicurean cult of friendship, and Kantian moralism which treats each man as an end.  He interests us not merely as a member of a class, a nation, or a collectivity, but as an individual man.  This distinguishes us from the systematic politician who cares only about collective destinies; and probably a tramp enjoying his bottle of wine, or a child playing with a balloon, or a Neapolitan lazzarone loafing in the sun in no way helps in the liberation of man; that is why the abstract will of the revolutionary scorns the concrete benevolence which occupies itself in satisfying desires which have no morrow.  However, it must not be forgotten that there is a concrete bond between freedom and existence; to will man free is to will there to be being, it is to will the disclosure of being in the joy of existence; in order for the idea of liberation to have a concrete meaning, the joy of existence must be asserted in each one, at every instant; the movement toward freedom assumes its real, flesh and blood figure in the world by thickening into pleasure, into happiness.  If the satisfaction of an old man drinking a glass of wine counts for nothing, then production and wealth are only hollow myths; they have meaning only if they are capable of being retrieved in individual and living joy.  The saving of time and the conquest of leisure have no meaning if we are not moved by the laugh of a child at play.  If we do not love life on our own account and through others, it is futile to seek to justify it in any way.  However, politics is right in rejecting benevolence to the extent that the latter thoughtlessly sacrifices the future to the present.  The ambiguity of freedom, which very often is occupied only in fleeing from itself, introduces a difficult equivocation into relationships with each individual taken one by one.  Just what is meant by the expression “to love others”? What is meant by taking them as ends? In any event, it is evident that we are not going to decide to fulfill the will of every man.  There are cases where a man positively wants evil, that is, the enslavement of other men, and he must then be fought.  It also happens that, without harming anyone, he flees from his own freedom, seeking passionately and alone to attain the being which constantly eludes him.  If he asks for our help, are we to give it to him? We blame a man who helps a drug addict intoxicate himself or a desperate man commit suicide, for we think that rash behavior of this sort is an attempt of the individual against his own freedom; he must be made aware of his error and put in the presence of the real demands of his freedom.  Well and good.  But what if he persists? Must we then use violence? There again the serious man busies himself dodging the problem; the values of life, of health, and of moral conformism being set up, one does not hesitate to impose them on others.  But we know that this pharisaism can cause the worst disasters: lacking drugs, the addict may kill himself.  It is no more necessary to serve an abstract ethics obstinately than to yield without due consideration to impulses of pity or generosity; violence is justified only if it opens concrete possibilities to the freedom which I am trying to save; by practising it I am willy-nilly assuming an engagement in relation to others and to myself; a man whom I snatch from the death which he had chosen has the right to come and ask me for means and reasons for living; the tyranny practised against an invalid can be justified only by his getting better; whatever the purity of the intention which animates me, any dictatorship is a fault for which I have to get myself pardoned.  Besides, I am in no position to make decisions of this sort indiscriminately; the example of the unknown person who throws himself in to the Seine and whom I hesitate whether or not to fish out is quite abstract; in the absence of a concrete bond with this desperate person my choice will never be anything but a contingent facticity.  If I find myself in a position to do violence to a child, or to a melancholic, sick, or distraught person the reason is that I also find myself charged with his upbringing, his happiness, and his health: I am a parent, a teacher, a nurse, a doctor, or a friend… So, by a tacit agreement, by the very fact that I am solicited, the strictness of my decision is accepted or even desired; the more seriously I accept my responsibilities, the more justified it is.  That is why love authorizes severities which are not granted to indifference.  What makes the problem so complex is that, on the one hand, one must not make himself an accomplice of that flight from freedom that is found in heedlessness, caprice, mania, and passion, and that, on the other hand, it is the abortive movement of man toward being which is his very existence, it is through the failure which he has assumed that he asserts himself as a freedom.  To want to prohibit a man from error is to forbid him to fulfill his own existence, it is to deprive him of life.  At the beginning of Claudel’s The Satin Shoe, the husband of Dona Prouheze, the Judge, the Just, as the author regards him, explains that every plant needs a gardener in order to grow and that he is the one whom heaven has destined for his young wife; beside the fact that we are shocked by the arrogance of such a thought (for how does he know that he is this enlightened gardener? Isn’t he merely a jealous husband?) this likening of a soul to a plant is not acceptable; for, as Kant would say, the value of an act lies not in its conformity to an external model, but in its internal truth.  We object to the inquisitors who want to create faith and virtue from without; we object to all forms of fascism which seek to fashion the happiness of man from without; and also the paternalism which thinks that it has done something for man by prohibiting him from certain possibilities of temptation, whereas what is necessary is to give him reasons for resisting it.  Thus, violence is not immediately justified when it opposes willful acts which one considers perverted; it becomes inadmissible if it uses the pretext of ignorance to deny a freedom which, as we have seen, can be practised within ignorance itself.  Let the “enlightened elites” strive to change the situation of the child, the illiterate, the primitive crushed beneath his superstitions; that is one of their most urgent tasks; but in this very effort they must respect a freedom which, like theirs, is absolute.  They are always opposed, for example, to the extension of universal suffrage by adducing the incompetence of the masses, of women, of the natives in the colonies; but this forgetting that man always has to decide by himself in the darkness, that he must want beyond what he knows.  If infinite knowledge were necessary (even supposing that it were conceivable), then the colonial administrator himself would not have the right to freedom; he is much further from perfect knowledge than the most backward savage is from him.  Actually, to vote is not to govern; and to govern is not merely to maneuver; there is an ambiguity today, and particularly in France, because we think that we are not the master of our destiny; we no longer hope to help make history, we are resigned to submitting to it; all that our internal politics does is reflect the play of external forces, no party hopes to determine the fate of the country but merely to foresee the future which is being prepared in the world by foreign powers and to use, as best we can, the bit of indetermination which still escapes their foresight.  Drawn along by this tactical realism, the citizens themselves no longer consider the vote as the assertion of their will but as a maneuver, whether one adheres completely to the maneuvering of a party or whether.  one invents his own strategy; the electors consider themselves not as men who are consulted about a particular point but as forces which are numbered and which are ordered about with a view to distant ends.  And that is probably why the French, who formerly were so eager to declare their opinions, take no further interest in an act which has become a disheartening strategy.  So, the fact is that if it is necessary not to vote but to measure the weight of one’s vote, this calculation requires such extensive information and such a sureness of foresight that only a specialized technician can have the boldness to express an opinion.  But that is one of the abuses whereby the whole meaning of democracy is lost; the logical conclusion of this would be to suppress the vote.  The vote should really be the expression of a concrete will, the choice of a representative capable of defending, within the general framework of the country and the world, the particular interests of his electors.  The ignorant and the outcast also has interests to defend; he alone is “competent” to decide upon his hopes and his trust.  By a sophism which leans upon the dishonesty of the serious, one does not merely argue about his formal impotence to choose, but one draws arguments from the content of his choice.  I recall, among others, the naivete of a rightthinking young girl who said, “The vote for women is all well and good in principle, only, if women get the vote, they’ll all vote red.” With like impudence it is almost unanimously stated today in France that if the natives of the French Union were given the rights of self-determination, they would live quietly in their villages without doing anything, which would be harmful to the higher interests of the Economy.  And doubtless the state of stagnation in which they choose to live is not that which a man can wish for another man; it is desirable to open new possibilities to the indolent negroes so that the interests of the Economy may one day merge with theirs.  But for the time being, they are left to vegetate in the sort of situation where their freedom can merely be negative: the best thing they can desire is not to tire themselves, not to suffer, and not to work; and even this freedom is denied them.  It is the most consummate and inacceptable form of oppression.  However, the “enlightened elite” objects, one does not let a child dispose of himself, one does not permit him to vote.  This is another sophism.  To the extent that woman or the happy or resigned slave lives in the infantile world of ready-made values, calling them “an eternal child” or “a grown-up child” has some meaning, but the analogy is only partial.  Childhood is a particular sort of situation: it is a natural situation whose limits are not created by other men and which is thereby not comparable to a situation of oppression; it is a situation which is common to all men and which is temporary for all; therefore, it does not represent a limit which cuts off the individual from his possibilities, but, on the contrary, the moment of a development in which new possibilities are won.  The child is ignorant because he has not yet had the time to acquire knowledge, not because this time has been refused him.  To treat him as a child is not to bar him from the future but to open it to him; he needs to be taken in hand, he invites authority, it is the form which the resistance of facticity, through which all liberation is brought about, takes for him.  And on the other hand, even in this situation the child has a right to his freedom and must be respected as a human person.  What gives Emile its value is the brilliance with which Rousseau asserts this principle.  There is a very annoying naturalistic optimism in Emile; in the rearing of the child, as in any relationship with others, the ambiguity of freedom implies the outrage of violence; in a sense, all education is a failure.  But Rousseau is right in refusing to allow childhood to be oppressed.  And in practice raising a child as one cultivates a plant which one does not consult about its needs is very different from considering it as a freedom to whom the future must be opened.  Thus, we can set up point number one: the good of an individual or a group of individuals requires that it be taken as an absolute end of our action; but we are not authorized to decide upon this end a priori.  The fact is that no behavior is ever authorized to begin with, and one of the concrete consequences of existentialist ethics is the rejection of all the previous justifications which might be drawn from the civilization, the age, and the culture; it is the rejection of every principle of authority.  To put it positively, the precept will be to treat the other (to the extent that he is the only one concerned, which is the moment that we are considering at present) as a freedom so that his end may be freedom; in using this conductingwire one will have to incur the risk, in each case, of inventing an original solution.  Out of disappointment in love a young girl takes an overdose of pheno-barbital; in the morning friends find her dying, they call a doctor, she is saved; later on she becomes a happy mother of a family; her friends were right in considering her suicide as a hasty and heedless act and in putting her into a position to reject it or return to it freely.  But in asylums one sees melancholic patients who have tried to commit suicide twenty times, who devote their freedom to seeking the means of escaping their jailers and of putting an end to their intolerable anguish; the doctor who gives them a friendly pat on the shoulder is their tyrant and their torturer.  A friend who is intoxicated by alcohol or drugs asks me for money so that he can go and buy the poison that is necessary to him; I urge him to get cured, I take him to a doctor, I try to help him live; insofar as there is a chance of my being successful, I am acting correctly in refusing him the sum he asks for.  But if circumstances prohibit me from doing anything to change the situation in which he is struggling, all I can do is give in; a deprivation of a few hours will do nothing but exasperate his torments uselessly; and he may have recourse to extreme means to get what I do not give him.  That is also the problem touched on by Ibsen in The Wild Duck.  An individual lives in a situation of falsehood; the falsehood is violence, tyranny: shall I tell the truth in order to free the victim? It would first be necessary to create a situation of such a kind that the truth might be bearable and that, though losing his illusions, the deluded individual might again find about him reasons for hoping.  What makes the problem more complex is that the freedom of one man almost always concerns that of other individuals.  Here is a married couple who persist in living in a hovel; if one does not succeed in giving them the desire to live in a more healthful dwelling, they must be allowed to follow their preferences; but the situation changes if they have children; the freedom of the parents would be the ruin of their sons, and as freedom and the future are on the side of the latter, these are the ones who must first be taken into account.  The Other is multiple, and on the basis of this new questions arise.  One might first wonder for whom we are seeking freedom and happiness.  When raised in this way, the problem is abstract; the answer will, therefore, be arbitrary, and the arbitrary always involves outrage.  It is not entirely the fault of the district social-worker if she is apt to be odious; because, her money and time being limited, she hesitates before distributing it to this one or that one, she appears to others as a pure externality, a blind facticity.  Contrary to the formal strictness of Kantianism for whom the more abstract the act is the more virtuous it is, generosity seems to us to be better grounded and therefore more valid the less distinction there is between the other and ourself and the more we fulfill ourself in taking the other as an end.  That is what happens if I am engaged in relation to others.  The Stoics impugned the ties of family, friendship, and nationality so that they recognized only the universal form of man.  But man is man only through situations whose particularity is precisely a universal fact.  There are men who expect help from certain men and not from others, and these expectations define privileged lines of action.  It is fitting that the negro fight for the negro, the Jew for the Jew, the proletarian for the proletarian, and the Spaniard in Spain.  But the assertion of these particular solidarities must not contradict the will for universal solidarity and each finite undertaking must also be open on the totality of men.  But it is then that we find in concrete form the conflicts which we have described abstractly; for the cause of freedom can triumph only through particular sacrifices.  And certainly there are hierarchies among the goods desired by men: one will not hesitate to sacrifice the comfort, luxury, and leisure of certain men to assure the liberation of certain others; but when it is a question of choosing among freedoms, how shall we decide? Let us repeat, one can only indicate a method here.  The first point is always to consider what genuine human interest fills the abstract form which one proposes as the action’s end.  Politics always puts forward Ideas: Nation, Empire, Union, Economy, etc.  But none of these forms has value in itself; it has it only insofar as it involves concrete individuals.  If a nation can assert itself proudly only to the detriment of its members, if a union can be created only to the detriment of those it is trying to unite, the nation or the union must be rejected.  We repudiate all idealisms, mysticisms, etcetera which prefer a Form to man himself.  But the matter becomes really agonizing when it is a question of a Cause which genuinely serves man.  That is why the question of Stalinist politics, the problem of the relationship of the Party to the masses which it uses in order to serve them, is in the forefront of the preoccupations of all men of good will.  However, there are very few who raise it without dishonesty, and we must first try to dispel a few fallacies.  The opponent of the U.S.S.R.  is making use of a fallacy when, emphasizing the part of criminal violence assumed by Stalinist politics, he neglects to confront it with the ends pursued.  Doubtless, the purges, the deportations, the abuses of the occupation, and the police dictatorship surpass in importance the violences practised by any other country; the very fact that there are a hundred and sixty million inhabitants in Russia multiplies the numerical coefficient of the injustices committed.  But these quantitative considerations are insufficient.  One can no more judge the means without the end which gives it its meaning than he can detach the end from the means which defines it.  Lynching a negro or suppressing a hundred members of the opposition are two analogous acts.  Lynching is an absolute evil; it represents the survival of an obsolete civilization, the perpetuation of a struggle of races which has to disappear; it is a fault without justification or excuse.  Suppressing a hundred opponents is surely an outrage, but it may have meaning and a reason; it is a matter of maintaining a regime which brings to an immense mass of men a bettering of their lot.  Perhaps this measure could have been avoided; perhaps it merely represents that necessary element of failure which is involved in any positive construction.  It can be judged only by being replaced in the ensemble of the cause it serves.  But, on the other hand, the defender of the U.S.S.R.  is making use of a fallacy when he unconditionally justifies the sacrifices and the crimes by the ends pursued; it would first be necessary to prove that, on the one hand, the end is unconditioned and that, on the other hand, the crimes committed in its name were strictly necessary.  Against the death of Bukharin one counters with Stalingrad; but one would have to know to what effective extent the Moscow trials increased the chances of the Russian victory.  One of the ruses of Stalinist orthodoxy is, playing on the idea of necessity, to put the whole of the revolution on one side of the scale; the other side will always seem very light.  But the very idea of a total dialectic of history does not imply that any factor is ever determining; on the contrary, if one admits that the life of a man may change the course of events, it is that one adheres to the conception which grants a preponderant role to Cleopatra’s nose and Cromwell’s wart.  One is here playing, with utter dishonesty, on two opposite conceptions of the idea of necessity: one synthetic, and the other analytic; one dialectic, the other deterministic.  The first makes History appear as an intelligible becoming within which the particularity of contingent accidents is reabsorbed; the dialectical sequence of the moments is possible only if there is within each moment an indetermination of the particular elements taken one by one.  If, on the contrary, one grants the strict determinism of each causal series, one ends in a contingent and disordered vision of the ensemble, the conjunction of the series being brought about by chance.  Therefore, a Marxist must recognize that none of his particular decisions involves the revolution in its totality; it is merely a matter of hastening or retarding its coming, of saving himself the use of other and more costly means.  That does not mean that he must retreat from violence but that he must not regard it as justified a priori by its ends.  If he considers his enterprise in its truth, that is, in its finiteness, he will understand that he has never anything but a finite stake to oppose to the sacrifices which he calls for, and that it is an uncertain stake.  Of course, this uncertainty should not keep him from pursuing his goals; but it requires that one concern himself in each case with finding a balance between the goal and its means.  Thus, we challenge every condemnation as well as every a prion justification of the violence practised with a view to a valid end.  They must be legitimized concretely.  A calm, mathematical calculation is here impossible.  One must attempt to judge the chances of success that are involved in a certain sacrifice; but at the beginning this judgment will always be doubtful; besides, in the face of the immediate reality of the sacrifice, the notion of chance is difficult to think about.  On the one hand, one can multiply a probability infinitely without ever reaching certainty; but yet, practically, it ends by merging with this asymptote: in our private life as in our collective life there is no other truth than a statistical one.  On the other hand, the interests at stake do not allow themselves to be put into an equation; the suffering of one man, that of a million men, are incommensurable with the conquests realized by millions of others, present death is incommensurable with the life to come.  It would be Utopian to want to set up on the one hand the chances of success multiplied by the stake one is after, and on the other hand the weight of the immediate sacrifice.  One finds himself back at the anguish of free decision.  And that is why political choice is an ethical choice: it is a wager as well as a decision; one bets on the chances and risks of the measure under consideration; but whether chances and risks must be assumed or not in the given circumstances must be decided without help, and in so doing one sets up values.  If in 1793 the Girondists rejected the violences of the Terror whereas a Saint-Just and a Robespierre assumed them, the reason is that they did not have the same conception of freedom.  Nor was the same republic being aimed at between 1830 and 1840 by the republicans who limited themselves to a purely political opposition and those who adopted the technique of insurrection.  In each case it is a matter of defining an end and realizing it, knowing that the choice of the means employed affects both the definition and the fulfillment.  Ordinarily, situations are so complex that a long analysis is necessary before being able to pose the ethical moment of the choice.  We shall confine ourselves here to the consideration of a few simple examples which will enable us to make our attitude somewhat more precise.  In an underground revolutionary movement when one discovers the presence of a stool-pigeon, one does not hesitate to beat him up; he is a present and future danger who has to be gotten rid of; but if a man is merely suspected of treason, the case is more ambiguous.  We blame those northern peasants who in the war of 1914-18 massacred an innocent family which was suspected of signaling to the enemy; the reason is that not only were the presumptions vague, but the danger was uncertain; at any rate, it was enough to put the suspects into prison; while waiting for a serious inquiry it was easy to keep them from doing any harm.  However, if a questionable individual holds the fate of other men in his hands, if, in order to avoid the risk of killing one innocent man, one runs the risk of letting ten innocent men die, it is reasonable to sacrifice him.  We can merely ask that such decisions be not taken hastily and lightly, and that, all things considered, the evil that one inflicts be lesser than that which is being forestalled.  There are cases still more disturbing because there the violence is not immediately efficacious; the violences of the Resistance did not aim at the material weakening of Germany; it happens that their purpose was to create such a state of violence that collaboration would be impossible; in one sense, the burning of a whole French village was too high a price to pay for the elimination of three enemy officers; but those fires and the massacring of hostages were themselves parts of the plan; they created an abyss between the occupiers and the occupied.  Likewise, the insurrections in Paris and Lyons at the beginning of the nineteenth century, or the revolts in India, did not aim at shattering the yoke of the oppressor at one blow, but rather at creating and keeping alive the meaning of the revolt and at making the mystifications of conciliation impossible.  Attempts which are aware that one by one they are doomed to failure can be legitimized by the whole of the situation which they create.  This is also the meaning of Steinbeck’s novel In Dubious Battle where a communist leader does not hesitate to launch a costly strike of uncertain success but through which there will be born, along with the solidarity of the workers, the consciousness of exploitation and the will to reject it.  It seems to me interesting to contrast this example with the debate in John Dos Passos’ The Adventures of a Young Man.  Following a strike, some American miners are condemned to death.  Their comrades try to have their trial reconsidered.  Two methods are put forward: one can act officially, and one knows that they then have an excellent chance of winning their case; one can also work up a sensational trial with the Communist Party taking the affair in hand, stirring up a press campaign and circulating international petitions; but the court will be unwilling to yield to this intimidation.  The party will thereby get a tremendous amount of publicity, but the miners will be condemned.  What is a man of good will to decide in this case? Dos Passos’ hero chooses to save the miners and we believe that he did right.  Certainly, if it were necessary to choose between the whole revolution and the lives of two or three men, no revolutionary would hesitate; but it was merely a matter of helping along the party propaganda, or better, of increasing somewhat its chances of developing within the United States; the immediate interest of the C.P.  in that country is only hypothetically tied up with that of the revolution; in fact, a cataclysm like the war has so upset the situation of the world that a great part of the gains and losses of the past have been absolutely swept away.  If it is really men which the movement claims to be serving, in this case it must prefer saving the lives of three concrete individuals to a very uncertain and weak chance of serving a little more effectively by their sacrifice the mankind to come.  If it considers these lives negligible, it is because it too ranges itself on the side of the formal politicians who prefer the Idea to its content; it is because it prefers itself, in its subjectivity, to the goals to which it claims to be dedicated.  Besides, whereas in the example chosen by Steinbeck the strike is immediately an appeal to the freedom of the workers and in its very failure is already a liberation, the sacrifice of the miners is a mystification and an oppression; they are duped by being made to believe that an effort is being made to save their lives, and the whole proletariat is duped with them.  Thus, in both examples, we find ourselves before the same abstract case: men are going to die so that the party which claims to be serving them will realize a limited gain; but a concrete analysis leads us to opposite moral solutions.  It is apparent that the method we are proposing, analogous in this respect to scientific or aesthetic methods, consists, in each case, of confronting the values realized with the values aimed at, and the meaning of the act with its content.  The fact is that the politician, contrary to the scientist and the artist, and although the element of failure which he assumes is much more outrageous, is rarely concerned with making use of it.  May it be that there is an irresistible dialectic of power wherein morality has no place? Is the ethical concern, even in its realistic and concrete form, detrimental to the interests of action? The objection will surely be made that hesitation and misgivings only impede victory.  Since, in any case, there is an element of failure in all success, since the ambiguity, at any rate, must be surmounted, why not refuse to take notice of it? In the first number of the Cahiers d’Action a reader declared that once and for all we should regard the militant communist as “the permanent hero of our time” and should reject the exhausting tension demanded by existentialism; installed in the permanence of heroism, one will blindly direct himself toward an uncontested goal; but one then resembles Colonel de la Roque who unwaveringly went right straight ahead of him without knowing where he was going.  Malaparte relates that the young Nazis, in order to become insensitive to the suffering of others, practised by plucking out the eyes of live cats; there is no more radical way of avoiding the pitfalls of ambiguity.  But an action which wants to serve man ought to be careful not to forget him on the way; if it chooses to fulfill itself blindly, it will lose its meaning or will take on an unforeseen meaning; for the goal is not fixed once and for all; it is defined all along the road which leads to it.  Vigilance alone can keep alive the validity of the goals and the genuine assertion of freedom.  Moreover, ambiguity can not fail to appear on the scene; it is felt by the victim, and his revolt or his complaints also make it exist for his tyrant; the latter will then be tempted to put everything into question, to renounce, thus denying both himself and his ends; or, if he persists, he will continue to blind himself only by multiplying crimes and by perverting his original design more and more.  The fact is that the man of action becomes a dictator not in respect to his ends but because these ends are necessarily set up through his will.  Hegel, in his Phenomenology, has emphasized this inextricable confusion between objectivity and subjectivity.  A man gives himself to a Cause only by making it his Cause; as he fulfills himself within it, it is also through him that it is expressed, and the will to power is not distinguished in such a case from generosity; when an individual or a party chooses to triumph, whatever the cost may be, it is their own triumph which they take for an end.  If the fusion of the Commissar and the Yogi were realized, there would be a self-criticism in the man of action which would expose to him the ambiguity of his will, thus arresting the imperious drive of his subjectivity and, by the same token, contesting the unconditioned value of the goal.  But the fact is that the politician follows the line of least resistance; it is easy to fall asleep over the unhappiness of others and to count it for very little; it is easier to throw a hundred men, ninety-seven of whom are innocent, into prison, than to discover the three culprits who are hidden among them; it is easier to kill a man than to keep a close watch on him; all politics makes use of the police, which officially flaunts its radical contempt for the individual and which loves violence for its own sake.  The thing that goes by the name of political necessity is in part the laziness and brutality of the police.  That is why it is incumbent upon ethics not to follow the line of least resistance; an act which is not destined, but rather quite freely consented to; it must make itself effective so that what was at first facility may become difficult.  For want of internal criticism, this is the role that an opposition must take upon itself.  There are two types of opposition.  The first is a rejection of the very ends set up by a regime: it is the opposition of anti-fascism to fascism, of fascism to socialism.  In the second type, the oppositionist accepts the objective goal but criticizes the subjective movement which aims at it; he may not even wish for a change of power, but he deems it necessary to bring into play a contestation which will make the subjective appear as such.  Thereby he exacts a perpetual contestation of the means by the end and of the end by the means.  He must be careful himself not to ruin, by the means which he employs, the end he is aiming at, and above all not to pass into the service of the oppositionists of the first type.  But, delicate as it may be, his role is, neverthless, necessary.  Indeed, on the one hand, it would be absurd to oppose a liberating action with the pretext that it implies crime and tyranny; for without crime and tyranny there could be no liberation of man; one can not escape that dialectic which goes from freedom to freedom through dictatorship and oppression.  But, on the other hand, he would be guilty of allowing the liberating movement to harden into a moment which is acceptable only if it passes into its opposite; tyranny and crime must be kept from triumphantly establishing themselves in the world; the conquest of freedom is their only justification, and the assertion of freedom against them must therefore be kept alive.